Customers report debit cards being declined in stores and pins blocked on New Year’s Day in latest embarrassment for banking group

NatWest and Royal Bank of Scotland customers have vented their anger after being hit by yet another banking glitch – this one affecting people using their debit cards in shops. Customers reported having their cards declined at tills and their pins being blocked.

It is an embarrassing start to the year for NatWest/RBS, which said a small number of customers – including New Year’s Day shoppers trying to take advantage of the post-Christmas sales – were having “issues” with point-of-sale transactions.

Customers voiced their frustrations on the banks’ Twitter and Facebook pages. Many said they had experienced difficulties using their cards to shop at various supermarkets, including branches of Tesco.

On Facebook, Stuart Davies-Roberts wrote: “Not a great new year when you’re stuck with a toddler in store and your card doesn’t work ‘pin blocked’!”.

Sandra Gallagher wrote: “Both mine & my husbands NatWest debit card declined in Tesco this morning. Tesco cashier said NatWest cards aren’t working today. Luckily had my Barclaycard.” Andy Wear added: “I too had my card blocked in Tescos today, thank god I didn’t need much shopping.”

Adam Day tweeted: “@NatWest_Help what’s going on with ur card payments been made to look a complete idiot in my local tesco due to your card problem.” He added: “I have never felt so embarrassed in all my life I am not happy and will be looking at leaving this is twice now.”

Gareth Williams tweeted: “Why is it always @NatWest_Help cards that fail to work? Good timing for a New Years resolution to get a decent bank.” Also on Twitter, Helen P wrote: “Disgraceful service from @NatWest_Help, just tried to pay & said pin was locked – I hope this is fixed soon or will be wanting compensation.”

Another Twitter user, Dave Leach, said: “I’ve been with @NatWest_Help for years, but I’m beginning to wonder for how much longer. Very poor IT again.” 

The banking group indicated that the technical glitch involved pin transactions, and that contactless payments, credit cards and ATM withdrawals were all unaffected. A spokeswoman said: “We’re aware of some issues with customers using debit cards and are working hard to fix them. We apologise for the inconvenience this has caused.”

A statement on the Natwest website said: “We are aware of an issue affecting some of our customers when making point of sale transactions at some retailers. The issue is being investigated as a matter of urgency. Where possible, alternative methods of payment should be used. Contactless payments, Apple Pay and Get Cash via the mobile app are working normally. We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.”

The group has suffered several IT meltdowns during the last few years. In September 2015, customers were hit by a technical problem that meant some could not withdraw cash or use their card in branches. In July, customers were locked out of their online bank accounts for nearly an hour, which RBS blamed on a cyber-attack. A month earlier, many were left without funds over a weekend after 600,000 transactions were delayed for several days.