Suzanna Broer, who joined retailer in 2014, dismissed in November for allegedly using racist language at work

Marks & Spencer has fired the head of its new loyalty card scheme, reportedly over the use of racist language.

Suzanna Broer, who was director of customer insight and loyalty, was dismissed in November for allegedly using racist language at work, according to the Sunday Times (paywall).

M&S declined to comment on the details of Broer’s departure, but a spokesperson said: “Marks & Spencer does not tolerate any form of discrimination in the workplace. We pride ourselves on being an equal opportunities employer and aim to create an inclusive and supportive environment across all of our workplaces at every level of our organisation. We will always take all the necessary steps to protect our employees from discrimination of any kind.”

Broer, who was headhunted from Dutch retailer Albert Heijn in 2014, led the introduction of M&S’s Sparks loyalty card scheme in October.

The revelation of her departure comes as M&S is expected to announce details of a tough festive season on Thursday.

The broker Nomura has predicted the retailer will report a 5.5% fall in sales of clothing and homewares at established stores in the three months to 26 December. Underlying food sales are expected to rise 0.4%.

Fraser Ramzan, retail analyst at Nomura, said M&S’s clothing sales were not likely to have improved in December from trends suggested by figures from market analysts Kantar in November.

In December 2014, M&S’s sales were badly disrupted by problems at the distribution centre which serves its online business. But Ramzan said warm weather and generally lacklustre trading on the high street over Christmas suggested sales of clothing and homewares in M&S stores were likely to have fallen by up to 10%, which would not be completely offset by a 33% rise in online orders.

The retailer’s hopes to build profit margins on clothing may also have been affected by discounting activity before Christmas as it tried to clear unwanted knitwear and coats. “The market is, if anything, weaker and the weather warmer in December,” Ramzan said.