World stock markets slipped on renewed fears of slowdown in China: could authorities make the mistake of intervening again?

Just a strong reaction to a weak set of Chinese factory data? Slow manufacturing numbers were a trigger for Monday’s China-inspired falls in stock markets around the globe, but the worries were also fuelled by memories of Beijing’s cack-handed attempts to prop up share prices last summer. Nobody wants a see another shambolic exercise in state-sponsored market intervention, but a repeat performance is a possibility.

To refresh memories, a 30% fall in the Shanghai Composite Index over a few weeks last May and June prompted a series of emergency measures that, if attempted in the west, would have been deemed ridiculous. State-backed investment funds spent billions buying stocks. Notionally independent stockbrokers and fund managers were encouraged to join in. Finance houses dished out cheap loans to private investors to bet on recovery.

It was an extraordinary response to what looked, to most outsiders, like a healthy correction in a stock market that had climbed too high, too quickly. The Shanghai Composite had previously gained 150% in a year and no market can sustain that pace.

Being generous, one could say the state-funded intervention to “uphold market stability” worked. Share prices indeed stabilised and Beijing got a pat on the back from the supposedly free-market International Monetary Fund for preventing a “disorderly” market. The Shanghai Composite ended 2015 up 9% on the year.

The problem, though, is that artificial props under share prices can be hard to remove. Worse, they sometimes require reinforcement if the old cracks are still apparent. That point may be arriving, since one factor behind Monday’s selling was the fear that large institutions will dump shares when the ban on sales is lifted soon. Investors’ underlying confidence in valuations, it seems, is weak.

Another contributor was the newly created “circuit breakers”, another product of last summer’s drama. Trading was suspended for 15 minutes after a 5% fall in the main index. When trading resumed, prices quickly hit the 7% cut-off point to halt trading for the day, a predictable response. Do circuit breakers calm nerves and allow cool heads to prevail, which is the ambition, or do they merely intensify panic when markets reopen?

We’ll find out in coming days. But, by most conventional yardsticks, Chinese stock markets are still severely overvalued. If prices continue to slide, it is easy to imagine another round of demands for the authorities to rescue investors in the name of stability and prevent a broader loss of confidence among over-borrowed households.

In reality, Beijing would be silly to get back on the intervention treadmill. In the end, the only sure way to create a stable stock market is to allow prices to find their own level. Far-sightedness, however, requires the authorities in a state-controlled economy to accept that share prices do not march to ordained scripts. There is no evidence that Beijing has accepted that lesson from last summer. No wonder investors elsewhere are worried.

Sports Direct is in the “clarification” business. In this instance, it wants to make clear that Michael Murray, the 26-year-old boyfriend of founder Mike Ashley’s daughter, is not a director of any Sports Direct company. Since nobody had suggested otherwise (instead, Murray was described as a director of three Ashley-linked companies outside Sports Direct) it is odd that the sportswear retailer felt annoyed.

So what is Murray’s role at Sports Direct itself? Investors were told he “heads up” the property team in the UK and abroad and has the task of finding new sites for the chain’s larger-format stores and its shop-plus-gym units. It’s a big job since the company is said to be spending £250m on expansion. 

It is also a job that most FTSE 100 retailers would hand to an experienced property specialist on a full-time basis. But Murray’s services are secured via a consultancy agreement and he is paid up to 25% of the “increased value” that Sports Direct’s non-executive directors judge to be created.

Why is the youthful Murray the best person for this role? How on earth do the non-executives go about calculating the “increased value” of a property purchase? And will shareholders be told the outcome of their deliberations?

At that point, Sports Direct’s clarifications cease. The company declined to answer all three questions. Outside shareholders must therefore accept the possibility that millions of pounds will be paid as a success fee to the boyfriend of the boss’s daughter without outsiders being told the basis of the payments.

Ashley owns 55% of the shares, so presumably can ignore all complaints from his outside investors. But to describe Monday’s statement as a clarification is a joke.

Mike Farley, former chief executive of Persimmon, left the housebuilder in April 2013 with “our gratitude and best wishes for his retirement”, as his chairman put it at the time. Warm words were appropriate since Persimmon, under Farley, was one of the few big UK housebuilders that did not require a bailout by its shareholders during the 2008-2011 downturn.

But Farley departed with more than mere thanks. He was also granted a slice of Persimmon’s grand 2012-22 incentive scheme, even though he was at the helm for less than a year of the performance period. His portion is now worth £16m and was delivered on New Year’s Eve even though the scheme runs to 2022. The award is indefensible: if the boss left after one lap of a 10-lap race, why should he get a prize?