Fears about Pyongyang’s threat to security added to tensions in a region plagued by uncertainty about the state of the Chinese economy

Asia Pacific stock markets have endured another day of losses after North Korea said it had conducted a nuclear test, stoking geopolitical concerns in the region.

The Nikkei share average in Tokyo closed down more than 15 at its lowest point since October last year while the Kospi index in Seoul suffered steep falls over concerns about its northern neighbour’s nuclear capability. In Australia the ASX/S&P200 benchmark index was down 1%.

“North Korea woes added to investor fears and hit further the Japanese market, which was already battered by geopolitical worries about the Middle East and volatility in Chinese shares,” said Norihiro Fujito, senior investment strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities.

The South Korean won also fell sharply on news about the nuclear test.

“We’ve been seeing dollar-long positions form from the beginning of the year and this North Korea news is not good for the market,” a Bank of Korea official told Reuters.

“However, when we consider previous cases we don’t feel this will have a sustained influence on markets,” he said. It was North Korea’s fourth nuclear test. 

Despite falls elsewhere in the region, Chinese stocks edged up on Wednesday on hopes that regulators would extend a ban on share sales by major stakeholders as Beijing scrambled to avert a potential repeat of last summer’s market crash. 

The CSI300 index of leading companies was up 1.5% in late afternoon trading.

State media reported the ban on some share sales, which had been due to expire on Friday, would remain in place until new rules to manage the process are promulgated. 

The market was also helped by statements from at least 30 companies saying their controlling shareholders or senior executives would not sell shares on the secondary market within the next six or 12 months to help stabilise the stock market. 

The reports were the latest damage-control measures announced after China’s major benchmark indexes plunged 7% on Monday, forcing the first-ever nationwide trading halt and roiling global markets. 

Many traders largely attributed Monday’s sell-off to fears that the expiry of the share sale ban, imposed during the height of the market rout last year, could see an estimated 1.24 trillion yuan ($190.23bn) of shares dumped onto the market. 

However, some say further restricting share sales by major shareholders was not justified, and would do little to help the market. 

“Extending the restrictions would only prolong the problem, rather than cure it,” said Shen Weizheng, fund manager at Shanghai-based Ivy Capital. Companies can extend the ban for six months, “but what about six months later? It’s like the sword of the Damocles overshadowing the market.” 

The latest worrying news on China came in a private survey which showed activity in China’s services sector expanded at its slowest rate in 17 months in December, bucking robust findings in an official survey and a further indication that the world’s second-largest economy has lost momentum. 

Policymakers and economists have been hoping that growth in services would offset persistent weakness in Chinese manufacturing and keep the economy from cooling too sharply.

As the move to safe haven assets such as the yen and the US dollar continued on Wednesday, markets were also rocked after the People’s Bank of China set the yuan’s midpoint rate at its weakest level in 4-1/2 years. 

China has guided the yuan lower since a surprise devaluation of the currency last summer, rattling traders who fear it could eventually set off a round of competitive devaluations which will put further pressure on other emerging economies. 

Some see the tactic as a desperate attempt by China to shore up growth, prompting concerns that the world’s second-biggest economy could be even weaker than imagined, though others say further yuan weakness is inevitable in the face of the strong US dollar. 

The US dollar touched a near three-month low of 118.35 yen and the euro slid to a nine-month trough of 127.465 yen . The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note yield fell by about three basis points to 2.22%. Bond yields move down when the price moves up. 

Kathy Lien, managing director of FX strategy at BK Asset Management in Tokyo, said that the US and Japanese currencies were being bought because “China is in trouble, U.S. data has been disappointing, Japan refuses to increase stimulus and oil prices continue to fall, but everyone’s greatest fear is that stocks have finally peaked”.

In commodities, crude oil prices struggled near 11-year lows and added to the pessimistic mood with the market giving more attention to the stronger dollar and swelling US inventories rather than growing tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran. 

Brent crude was up slightly at to $36.45 a barrel, still in reach of the 11-year trough of $35.98 hit late last month.