Small, sharp and easy to live with: the only big decision you face when buying an Audi TT is whether to go soft or hard.

Price: from £29,915MPG: up to 61.4Top speed: 155mph

Once you’ve decided to splash your cash on a neat hedonistic sports car, you have one further indulgent decision to make. Do you go for the coupé or the open-top roadster? Closed or open? Groomed or wind-blasted? Swot or swank? In the coupé you get the roof and two cramped yet functional perch seats in the back. In the roadster you lose the roof and you lose those tiny seats. This means you also lose your ability to offer a viable transport solution for your teenage daughter’s netball team. Which was how I came to make the same 2.7-mile round trip six times in a row. Each time I asked the girls the same two questions: what brand of car is this? And what does TT stand for?

Not one of the girls got either question right (Audi and Tourist Trophy). But they all loved the car because: “It’s sooooo cute!” And they are absolutely right about that.

The first TT rolled out of the Audi factory in Gyor, Hungary, in 1998. Its Bauhaus curves and teardrop roofline, vaguely reminiscent of a slightly squished VW Beetle, gave it instant traction with speed enthusiasts. It was a driver’s car for those without the budget, or the cojones, to carry off a Porsche. A year later the soft-top version joined the fray and its double rabbit-ear roll hoops made it a favourite across the board.

This is now the third generation, and each iteration has built on the shoulders of the last. It has a multilayered fabric roof that folds in seconds. A wind deflector pops up behind you so the cabin stays draught free even on a cold winter’s day. The open roof also gives passersby a chance to admire the cabin. It’s proper posh, a masterclass in leather upholstery. When you find yourself idly tracing the stitching with a lazy finger you realise you are in the realm of the boutique dungeon, not a car interior. The dash has been upgraded to a virtual cockpit – dials and gauges are all now digital – which creates a wonderfully uncluttered space.

And to drive? The TT hasn’t always been revered for its performance, but third time round, Audi’s engineers have nailed it and created something really dramatic. It’s irresistible. The TT leaps into corners with relish and wolfs its way up and down swooping hills in spectacular fashion. There’s a selection of engines on offer, from the green-fingered 184bhp 2-litre TDI which does 61 mpg, to the bully-boy 227bhp 2-litre TFSI Quattro which does 0-62 in under 5 seconds, but drinks twice as much fuel.

And so, my decision? The roadster – sorry, netballers.

Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter at @MartinLove166