Backed by Chinese tech billionaire Jia Yueting, the car firm’s first unveiling in Las Vegas revealed a modular high performance car, but little detail

California-based Faraday Future revealed its first prototype high performance electric car, the FF01, at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas on Monday, ending some of the mystery that has surrounded a company some believed was a front for Apple’s much-rumoured electric car. 

The US-based company is funded, in part at least, by Chinese billionaire Jia Yueting. Yueting founded China’s largest online video service and is rumoured to be worth some $6bn. While Faraday Future lists several of its high-ranking executives there is no information about who runs the business as a whole, and no chief executive is named on the company’s website.

With an uncanny resemblance to the batmobile, the concept car is based around what Faraday Future calls a “variable platform architecture”. The concept is that the car is fully customisable to allow one platform to be used for a variety of different vehicle styles. Electric motors to drive the wheels can be added or removed, allowing for two-wheel-drive or all-wheel-drive. The company can add almost any type of body to the car, so anything from a people carrier to a sports car is, in theory, possible. It is, in effect, a modular platform that the company thinks will be the future of car design. 

Details about the car itself were vague. No specs were given about battery technology used, range, or how fast the car will be when it launches in two years. The company did say that the battery arrangement, which it calls “strings”, is very flexible, allowing dead battery packs to be bypassed and the number of individual cells to be changed depending on the body style of the final vehicle. 

The concept also has an augmented reality system to assist the driver, but there was no indication given of it making it into the final production car. 

Headquartered near Los Angeles, Faraday Future will eventually move to a 3m square foot factory in Las Vegas – another interesting parallel with Tesla, which has already started building its Gigafactory in the state. Tesla’s facility will, however, solely focus on producing the lithium-ion batteries that power its cars, rather than the vehicles.

One of Faraday’s top designers, Porter Harris, left the company this month, Bloomberg reported. Harris was recruited from Tesla owner Elon Musk’s SpaceX, and now lists his employer as Lotus Research & Development on his LinkedIn page.

The company’s teaser video showing the FF01 in more detail is on YouTube.