Rikki Campbell denies her guests smoked cannabis and had sex at party in rented London flat

The woman who hosted a New Year’s Eve party at an Airbnb London flat has denied she broke any rules after its owner claimed it was trashed by more than 100 drug-taking revellers who caused £3,000 in damage.

Rikki Campbell said on Tuesday she had rented the flat to celebrate her 21st birthday, which is on New Year’s Day. She admitted having 60 people at the west London flat but claimed she had a right to hold a gathering, despite having only booked for one guest to stay.

Police are investigating reports of an assault at the flat in Putney, after the owner Christina McQuillan, 31, reportedly claimed one partygoer punched her in the stomach.

The magazine designer told the Evening Standard she found people smoking cannabis. She said there was damage including ripped-up floorboards, a television pulled off the wall, as well as a couple having sex in the upstairs bedroom while a man watched.

McQuillan told the Standard she had been alerted to the party by a neighbour, and found hundreds of people on the streets, music blaring and the smell of marijuana.

Campbell denied any sex had taken place in the bedroom or that drugs were taken. “There were no drugs in the home at all because I don’t smoke and my friends didn’t bring anything because it was my party,” the London-born student said. “My friends were not drunken, and they all left without argument even though she had no right. She broke our contract while I kept all the rules.

“There was no sex happening. The owner happened to walk in after my female friend ran up and hugged me, because she hadn’t seen me in so long and I fell back on the bed holding her.”

In messages seen by the Guardian, Campbell wrote on Airbnb to the flat’s owner that she was “booking your apartment so I can stay in central London for new year’s celebrations”. She paid £138 to rent the flat for one night, but did not mention there would be anyone but herself at the property. The listing states a maximum of two guests can stay in the property.

“He [the owner] may have mistaken my words but I definitely did not say I’d be just sleeping there, and I said I’d be having celebrations, as you can see. There was no further questioning to my stay,” Campbell said. “Every other house states whether parties or noise are allowed.”

Campbell posted a screengrab of a refund receipt for her stay from Airbnb on her Instagram. Airbnb told the Guardian that the refund was an error by a member of staff which should not have been processed, and said it was reviewing internal procedures. 

“The refund does not in any way reflect a change in our stance with regards to the situation,” an Airbnb spokesman said.

On Monday, Airbnb said it was in touch with McQuillan and was providing full support, including assessing the costs of the damage. “We have zero tolerance for this kind of behaviour and have removed this guest from our platform,” the company said.

A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said they had been called to the address shortly before midnight on New Year’s Eve following reports of a woman punched in the stomach, and that inquiries were ongoing. 

“The suspect has not been identified and no arrests have been made,” a spokesman said.