For a forum that usually features the most future facing innovations in the tech world, there was a definite retro vibe to the 2016 CES product preview

If you saw the products announced at Sony’s CES media conference, you could be forgiven for thinking you were stepping back in time.

The company kicked things off with a camcorder (albeit an ultra high definition 4k one), before moving on to show off a turntable. Yes, one for playing vinyl records.

It remains to be seen whether the vinyl revival is a long-term trend or a blip, but manufacturers are keeping busy exploiting the demand for turntables; UK music retailer HMV sold one every minute during the Christmas sales period.

Sony has responded with the PS-HX500, although this turntable does more than play records; it can digitise them as well. Once tracks are converted to a digital format, audiophiles will be able to use an app for editing. The company plans to release the turntable in a few months.

Also announced on Tuesday, although not on stage, was a new line of Walkman portable music players. The latest offerings come in a variety of colours, and are capable of playing tracks in a number of formats, including MP3, AAC, AIFF, WAV, FLAC, and ALAC. 

Sony also showed off a set of speakers that light up in time with the music being played and a light bulb that doubles as a speaker. A change to backlighting technology for televisions, promising “deeper blacks”, was among the other announcements as was an updated range of cameras.

One thing notably absent from Sony’s press conference was PlayStation VR, its latest virtual reality headset. Rumour had it that the company would be announcing a release date and pricing information but, although the headset made its way on to Sony’s signage at the show, it was notably absent from the stage presentation.

Previously known as project Morpheus, the headset made its debut during the Game Developers Conference in 2015. Sony had slated its release for the “first half of 2016” but hasn’t offered any additional details. 

Unlike some rival products, PlayStationVR produces two sets of images: one for the person wearing the headset, and another that can be displayed on screen to be seen by others who aren’t wearing the headset.