Almost 20,000 people watch #DrummondPuddleWatch in awe as people in the north of England attempt to cross a giant puddle, in what may be the best use of Periscope yet

Britain has been captivated by a live stream of people attempting to cross a puddle in Newcastle.

You heard that right. In what may be the best use of the live-streaming app Periscope we have seen to date, tens of thousands of people were gripped as pedestrians jumped, climbed or tiptoed over a comically large puddle.

Some climb on the embankment. Some use the lampost as leverage. Cyclists just whizz past. It is a truly captivating spectacle and has brought British office workers to a standstill.

#drummondpuddlewatch pic.twitter.com/U5XzvnDFCA

A guy just placed a 'slippery when wet' sign in the Drummond puddle and it's amazing #DrummondPuddleWatch pic.twitter.com/akjYHE0ZHV

I'm enjoying this far too much #DrummondPuddleWatch pic.twitter.com/yU4wx37910

Have a bunch of stuff to do before I leave for the day but all I can do is stare at a puddle. #DrummondPuddleWatch

On the big screen here @TwitterUK #DrummondPuddleWatch pic.twitter.com/WMMKyZRm3T

Including at the Guardian...

Guardian Puddle Watch https://t.co/lEpJShZaQY pic.twitter.com/axKK2wWiZN

And if you think they were the only ones, you’d be wrong: at its peak, almost 20,000 people were watching.

Inevitably, the puddle got so famous, someone brought a lilo and tweeted themselves sliding through the puddle:

#DrummondPuddleWatch woooo pic.twitter.com/3a5kZSOMhO

Later, there were surfboards and a bit of a crowd as the puddle’s fame spread. By Wednesday afternoon, someone had even listed a bottle of puddle water on eBay.

The masterminds of this ever-so British viral hit is marketing agency Drummond Central. Managing director Beth Hazon told the Guardian that she and her staff have watched people from a window in the top floor of their building in Jesmond Road, Newcastle navigate the puddle for weeks now.

On Wednesday morning, copywriter Steve Wilkes suggested they set up an iPhone and live stream it for the day.

“Every single day, we’ve been watching people try to get over this puddle - it’s been raining quite a lot,” she said.

“It got a lot of attention locally and then, mid-afternoon, it just exploded. We’ve used Periscope before, but it’s never been like this.

“All I can say is, god bless the internet.”

Amen to that. 

Richard Rippon, the 43-year-old social media manager whose phone was being used to stream the internet sensation, said his phone battery almost spoiled the party when it got down to 6%, but now it’s on charge and has been blu-tacked to the window so it can stay online all night.

“I think everybody’s enjoying the various different techniques employed by people in getting over the puddle. A lot of people in the office had it up on the screens and it became more and more addictive so we just let it run and run. People have it up on their screens as if it’s a big sporting event. It’s brilliant, I feel great.”

Like all good things, the puddle live stream came to an end. Around 17,000 people were still watching when it ended at 5.15pm on Wednesday. 

 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information. 