A countdown conundrum

Happy New Year guzzlers.

For a few years now, my early January ritual has been to solve the following puzzle: fill in the equation that counts down to the year that has just begun.

In other words, fill in the blanks so that this equation makes arithmetical sense:

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 = 2016

You are allowed to use ONLY the four basic arithmetical operations: +, -, x, ÷. But brackets can be used wherever needed. So, for example, the solution could begin 

or

or with an entirely different combination of operations. Some years are more difficult than others - that’s part of the fun! It’s a pleasant limbering up of the neurons after the end of year break.

If you want to show off, you can introduce new mathematical operations such as powers, square roots, concatenation and decimals, such as a solution that begins:

109 ÷ √8 – 76 x 0.5...

Or use the factorial symbol !, where a number followed by ! means that you multiply it by every number less than it. So, 3! = 3 x 2 x 1, and 9! = 9 x 8 x 7 x 6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1. The rule is always that the left side of the equation contains only the numbers from 10 to 1 in order, whichever symbols or operations you use, and the right side is the year, in this case 2016.

Tweet your solutions with the hashtag #MondayPuzzle and I’ll post the best ones in my solution post later today.

The most famous “fill in the gaps in the equation” puzzle is known as the four fours, because every equation is of the form

4 4 4 4 = X.

In the classic form of the puzzle you must find a solution for X = 0 to 9 using just addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. If you allow square roots, powers, concatenation, decimals and factorials you can go much higher...

In fact, there is a very nice solution to this equation of five fours

4 4 4 4 4 = 2016

Can you find it?

Please dont spoil it for others by writing the answer straight away in the comments below

EXTRA!!! PRIZE!!! I’ll send a free copy of any of my books to the person who submits on Twitter (or by email) a solution to the first problem using the largest number of mathematical symbols/operations, in a way I deem to be the most interesting and creative. Competition ends 4.30pm GMT today.

I post a puzzle here on a Monday every two weeks.

My most recent book is the mathematical adult colouring book Snowflake Seashell Star. (In the US its title is Patterns of the Universe.)

You can check me out on Twitter, Facebook, Google+ and my personal website.

And if know of any great puzzles that you would like me to set here, get in touch.