With the junior doctors’ strike now back on, Jack Saunders takes a historical look at how NHS doctor ‘militancy’ has changed

Novelty has been a major theme in much of the coverage of the junior doctors’ strike. Here was a group of middle-class professionals behaving, as Jeremy Hunt implied, like “trade union militants”. Yet doctors have long used collective protest to shape the NHS and their role within it, and their different motivations reflect changing relationships and attitudes towards the health service. 

For instance, in 1947, doctors contested plans for the new National Health Service, looking to retain their independent contractor status rather than becoming salaried employees. They threatened to boycott the new service if the government didn’t retain “capitation”, a practice where doctors were paid per registered patient.

1975 was another fractious year, with both consultants and junior doctors engaging in partial strikes. The consultants’ protests were a straight fight between the best-paid doctors and the lowest-paid auxiliaries and nurses. For several years the latter had campaigned against fee-paying beds in NHS hospitals (used by consultants’ private patients) and the extra unpaid work they involved. From 1973 onwards hospital workers had been boycotting these private patients, while consultants responded with threats to strike if the government abolished them. 

 The junior doctors’ strike of 1975 was also about hours and overtime. The then Labour Government wanted to restrain public sector pay to combat inflation, and proposed to reduce overtime pay by two thirds. In response, junior doctors, organised in the Hospital Junior Staff Committee (HJSC) of the BMA, opposed any decline in pay and called for a 40-hour standard week (rather than the 44-hour one promised), and higher overtime rates. In October thousands of junior doctors organised bans on non-emergency work. 

There is, then, historical precedent for industrial action by doctors. However, I would argue that there is novelty to be found, particularly in the themes of different generations’ protests, which reveal a profound transformation in cultural attitudes both towards and amongst doctors. 

In all three of the disputes highlighted, doctors were primarily engaged in defending perceived self-interest against the public: in 1947 their right to remain independent in the face of universal healthcare and in 1975, the consultants’ right to use NHS resources for personal gain.

 Even the junior doctors’ dispute, the most similar to today’s protests, was articulated in different language. Unlike today, doctors then seem to have felt little need to brand their collective action as a defence of the service by proxy, arguing in terms of their living standards. Dr Wasily Sakalo, an Australian doctor of Ukrainian descent and chair of the North-West Committee of HJSC who earned particular notoriety as a militant in the 1975 strike, put the doctors’ case in The Times on 19 November 1975: 

 One of my sisters, Alla, who is 24, is a first-year house officer [in Australia] and she is earning £9,000 for 40 hours, with time and a quarter for overtime. She has been qualified for nine months. I have been qualified for seven years and I am on £4,500. It made me determined to try to obtain the same work conditions for British doctors. 

 In contrast, in today’s dispute, doctors’ representatives articulate themselves almost universally in terms of their defence of the service and the public sector more generally. As the rallying cry put out by the BMA National Executive on January 4 puts it: “It is our view that the proposed contract represents an existential danger to the NHS as an institution.” 

 The developments of the next few months will have consequences stretching far into the future. This government is wilfully putting at risk our patients’ safety, the tolerability of our working lives as NHS workers and the very viability of the NHS as a publicly-funded, publicly-provided service 

Equally novel are the levels of inter-occupational solidarity on display. Not only have the junior doctors received unprecedented support from more senior colleagues and health unions, but they also now articulate themselves in similar terms: 

 The public messages of support from our allied health worker colleagues, the firefighters, the teaching unions and the TUC have galvanised junior doctors. We are therefore well aware that all eyes are upon us and that the institutions which represent the wider working class stand with us in solidarity.

 Such sentiments would have been alien to their predecessors and show how much doctors’ relationship with the NHS has changed over the past 40 years. Although junior doctors still talk about pay, they usually do so within an overarching narrative that talks of defending the service as a whole. Similarly, although there is still a great deal of hesitancy from all sections of the NHS workforce about the moral implications of strike action, it’s clear that junior doctors’ colleagues are widely supportive of their demands and understanding of their militancy. Over its 67 years of existence, doctors in the NHS have forged an increasingly strong relationship to the service and to colleagues. Decades of working together for an embattled public institution seems to have forged a new solidaristic collectivism, enabling them to now use “defence of the service” and inter-occupational solidarity as an increasingly important weapon in their collective action. 

Jack Saunders is a research fellow on the Cultural History of the NHS project at the University of Warwick