Cancer screening may not save lives, researchers say in the British Medical Journal, but others say UK screening programmes have cut the number of deaths

The benefits of cancer screening have been overstated and the practice may not even save lives, experts in the US and Germany have claimed.

While there may be fewer deaths from the specific cancer for which screening takes place, little account is taken of the harm some patients suffer psychologically and medically because of overdiagnosis and complications from treatment, an article and editorial in the BMJ medical journal suggest.

An analysis by Vinay Prasad at Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, and colleagues suggests screening tests may be giving “false positive” results (suggesting abnormalities that turn out not to be there) and finding harmless cancers that might never have caused symptoms.

When it comes to prostate cancer screening, generally accepted now as unreliable, men diagnosed with the diseases are more likely to have a heart attack, take their own lives in the year after diagnosis or die of complications from treatment, they say.

This is by no means the first challenge to what authors see as weaknesses in “underpowered” research programmes used to justify screening – last summer epidemiologists suggested the benefits of breast cancer checks had been exaggerated.

But enthusiasts insist UK programmes to spot breast, bowel and cervical cancers have cut the number of deaths.

Prasad and his colleagues say healthcare providers must be frank about the limitations of screening – “the harms of screening are certain, but the benefits in overall mortality are not”. They add: “Declining screening may be a reasonable and prudent choice for many people.”

Gerd Gigerenzer of the Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, said in the accompanying editorial: “Rather than pouring resources into ‘megatrials’ with a small chance of detecting a minimal overall mortality reduction, at the additional cost of harming large numbers of patients, we should invest in transparent information in the first place.

“It is time to change communication about cancer screening from dodgy persuasion into something straightforward.”

Dr Anne Mackie, director of screening at Public Health England, which manages the NHS programmes, said: “Cancer screening and follow-up treatment does prevent or can at least delay some people dying from cancer.

“There is clear and robust evidence of the benefits of bowel cancer screening and falls in deaths from cervical cancer. The independent Marmot review into breast screening in 2012 concluded that screening reduces breast cancer mortality by 20%.” 

Mackie added that for a screening programme to be recommended, “there needs to be some potential benefit for the individual being offered screening and that the benefits for the population outweigh the harms and should be cost-effective”.

Cancer Research UK, which, with the English government’s national director for cancer, commissioned the 2012 review, said spotting cancers early, before people had any symptoms, was an important way to reduce cancer deaths. 

Julie Sharp, its head of health and patient information, said UK programmes for breast, bowel and cervical cancers had been shown to reduce the number of people dying from these cancers. 

“In the UK there’s no screening programme for prostate or lung cancer because there isn’t good evidence that, overall, the benefits are likely to outweigh the harms. 

“It’s vital that everyone is given clear, unbiased information on how the harms and benefits of screening stack up so they can make an informed choice about whether to accept their screening invitation.”