In Saturday’s draw the ‘expected value’ of a ticket is greater than its cost. Don’t get too excited through: the odds of scooping the jackpot with six balls are still 1 in 45 million

Buying a ticket for today’s national lottery draw makes mathematical sense for the first time in its history. 

The jackpot – which will be around £58m - is the largest since the lottery began in 1994. But that’s not what makes today’s draw unusually interesting.

Today’s draw is noteworthy because the rule changes made to the lottery last year have resulted in an anomalous situation where the “expected value” of each £2 ticket – that is, the amount you can expect to win per ticket on average – is more than £2.

Usually, the expected value of a £2 Lotto ticket is about 95p. In other words, if you play the lottery a lot, on average you will only get 95p back for every £2 you spend. While there is a tiny chance of becoming a millionaire, in the long run, on average, you will lose money.

Yet tonight, the expected value of each ticket could be as much as £4.50, according to accountants KPMG.

In other words, if you played a lottery like the one today many times, then for every £2 you spend you would win back £4.50. In the long run, on average, you would make money.

“In mathematical terms, it’s a rare occurrence when the expected value from playing the lottery is higher than the cost of a ticket - statistically there has never been a better time to play!” said Josh White, an associate director in KPMG’s economics practice.

The unusually high expected value is a consequence of rules Camelot introduced last year: since October punters have had to choose six numbers from 1 to 59, rather than from 1 to 49 as was previously the case.

The changes lengthened the odds of winning a jackpot from 1 in 14 million to 1 in 45 million. As a result, fewer people have won jackpots, and the unclaimed jackpot money has been rolled over to the following draw.

After 14 rollovers, the jackpot on Wednesday stood at just over £50m, the highest it has ever been.

The new rules, however, also stipulate that if the jackpot exceeds £50m, the money must be paid out in the following draw – whether or not any ticket gets all six balls.

If no one picks the correct six tonight, the jackpot will be distributed between those with most correct balls.

If the number of people who buy lottery tickets today is the same as an average Saturday, KPMG estimate the expected value will be £4.50. If, however, the number of people is equal to the number who bought tickets for Wednesday’s draw, the expected value will drop to about £3.20.

“You’d need close to all 50 million eligible people in the UK to purchase at least one ticket in order for the expected value to go below the £2 purchase price – pretty unlikely, and a big queue at the newsagents!” added Adam Rivers of KPMG.

Even though it is a mathematical curiosity that the expected value today will most likely be greater than the price of a ticket, this does not mean that anyone playing the lottery can expect to make money.

Expected value is an average over the long run, but there is no long run when it comes to massive rollover jackpots. Once tonight’s money has been paid out, the expected value of a ticket will return to 95p next week.

Most people having a flutter today will not win anything at all. The likelihood of winning the jackpot with six balls remains 1 in 45 million.

Still, today is a better bet than normal because of the possible redistribution of the prize money. If no one gets all six balls – the chances of winning a share of the jackpot becomes 1 in 7.5 million, which is the chance of five balls plus the bonus. If no one gets five balls and the bonus, the chance of the jackpot is 1 in 144,000, which is the chance of five balls.

 If you are only going to buy one lottery ticket all year, today’s probably the day.