‘Dinosaur foreplay’ was a ritual, bird-like dance, according to paleontologists who studied huge scrape marks left behind by the animals in western Colorado

Predatory dinosaurs performed a ritual, bird-like dance to woo their mates, according to paleontologists who have studied huge scrape marks left behind by the animals in western Colorado.

Paleobiologists have long speculated that dinosaurs had mating rituals like those of their descendants, modern birds, but the scrapes would be the first physical evidence of “dinosaur foreplay”, lead scientist Martin Lockley said. 

“We know they had feathers and crests and good vision,” Lockley said, speaking of theropods, the carnivore family of Tyrannosaurs rex. “They were visual animals, but there’s never been any actual physical evidence that their anatomy and behavior was co-opted for fairly energetic display. This is physical evidence.”

The roughly 50 scrape marks were found in 100m-year-old sandstone, in irregular groupings that look like the display arenas some birds gather in to compete for mates. The scrapes run in five- and six-foot patterns that resemble the traces left behind by courting birds.

Dinosaur love nests and dance floors and all this stuff, it’s neat, you know?

In a paper published on Thursday in Scientific Reports, Lockley and his co-authors compared the patterns to those left by puffins and ostriches, and deduced that the marks did not represent nests or digging for water or food.

Lockley, a professor of geology with the University of Colorado Denver, said the scored and scratched patterns converged nicely with longstanding interpretations of dinosaur behavior and the study of modern birds.

“Birds make love and war ceremonially,” he said. “They’re very, very energetic. They’re no holds barred when it comes to showing off.”

He added that he thought the dinosaurs made vocal sounds as birds do during their mating ceremonies. “Can you imagine these dinosaurs getting really excited about mating, doing all of this frenzied physical activity, and then just being mute, silent?”

The exact species of dinosaur that may have danced is unknown, but Acrocanthosaurus, a gigantic, ridged-back theropod that lived in the wetlands of western North America in the Cretaceous, is a suspect. Tracks attributed to the species resemble dinosaur prints found near the leks. 

Steve Brusatte, a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh who was not involved in the research, said the researchers “presented a pretty strong case” for their hypothesis, despite the inherent problems of studying behaviors of an animal that no longer exists. 

“Footprints are kind of like trying to interpret a crime scene where there’s mostly circumstantial evidence,” he said. “You’re like a cop looking at footprints left behind by the murderer and trying to figure out who they were, what they looked like, how the crime unfolded. There’s always going to be a little guesswork and artistry.”

But he noted that fossils can reveal some certainties – for instance what ancient animals ate, how they nested and herded – and said comparing theropod behavior to birds’ was a persuasive method.

“We know these dinosaurs were very birdlike in so many aspects,” he said, “and a sort of ritualistic mating behavior could explain these unusual traces. Maybe they stomped their feet around for another reason, but I think we have to draw the most reasonable conclusion we can based on what we know of living animals, and modern birds are more dinosaur-like than anything else.”

In recent years paleobiologists have similarly turned to birds and crocodiles to theorize as to how dinosaurs had sex – a question that has puzzled scientists for more than a hundred years, especially when confronted with the plates of a Stegosaurus or 80-foot length of a Brachiosaurus.

Brusatte added that he was sure the paper would draw attention: “Dinosaur love nests and dance floors and all this stuff, it’s neat, you know?”