It’s about time the 20-year-old guidelines on alcohol consumption were updated, but the new evidence makes for sobering reading

For the first time since 1995, government recommendations on alcohol drinking have been updated. And it’s about time too, although it’s a bit cruel to announce these new guidelines on the first working Friday of the year.

Given that these new guidelines advise drinking less per session, on fewer days per week, and less overall (for men - the guidelines now bring the recommended limit per week in line for men and women at 14 units), it’s likely that there will be cries of “nanny state”! But these guidelines are just that: evidence-based advice to help the public make informed choices. 

While the harms of smoking are well known, the harms from alcohol are at present poorly understood by the general public, probably due to a combination of out-of-date government advice, media reporting on individual studies out of context from the rest of the literature, and a lack of clarity about alcohol units and what they represent.

Scientific understanding of the effects of alcohol has advanced a great deal in the 20 years since the previous guidelines. And unfortunately for those of us who enjoy a pint or a nice Sauvignon Blanc, the most up to date evidence suggests that the previous guidelines both underestimated the harms and overestimated the benefits somewhat. In particular, the evidence that alcohol increases the risk of some cancers has grown stronger, while previous suggestions that small amounts of alcohol could be protective for the heart now seem less likely to be the case. The new guidelines point out that there’s no ‘safe’ level of alcohol consumption. But we encounter risks every day, and alcohol is just another of these. 

Since 1995, a large amount of evidence has emerged suggesting that not only is alcohol use associated with various cancers, but that the association seems to be causal in nature. But how risky is a glass of wine or a pint of beer? Different cancers not only have different underlying prevalence (regardless of alcohol use), but alcohol increases the risk of getting different cancers to varying degrees. 

As a specific example, the risk of bowel cancer in men who do not drink is around 64 cases per 1000 men. This rate doesn’t increase for men who drink within the new recommended range (up to 14 units per week), but for those who drink more than 35 units a week it increases to around 115 cases per 1000 men. Alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer in women at even lower levels of drinking. The risk in non-drinkers is around 109 cases per 1000 women. Even drinking within the new recommended limit increases the risk slightly (to around 126 women per 1000), but drinking more than 35 units nearly doubles the risk to 206 cases per 1000 women.

A figure of 14 units per week was settled upon by the scientists who helped develop of these guidelines because this represents just under a 1% lifetime risk of death due to alcohol use (from any cause, not just due to cancer). How does this compare to other risks we expose ourselves to? It’s about equivalent to your lifetime risk of bowel cancer (a diagnosis, rather than death from it) if you eat three rashers of bacon every day. It’s much lower than your risk of death if you’re a smoker, which current estimates put at greater than 1 in 2. Conversely, your lifetime risk of being killed in a car accident is 1 in around 230; less than half as likely as your risk of an alcohol related death if you drink within the new guidelines. 

A number of studies investigating alcohol and ischaemic heart disease in those over 40 have found what’s known as a ‘J’ shaped curve association, whereby those who drink a small amount seem to be at a lower risk for heart disease than those who do not drink at all. While it’s possible that this could mean that small amounts of alcohol are beneficial for older peoples’ hearts, these kind of curves can also be indicative of biases in the underlying data. Some researchers have argued that the type of person who drinks a small amount is likely to be healthier at that age due to being wealthier for example, or that people of that age who do not drink at all may have stopped doing so because of poor health.

Even if there is a benefit of drinking a small amount of alcohol to women over 55 (as these new guidelines do not rule out), this benefit is greatest for very low rates of alcohol consumption (around 1 unit per day, well under the 14 unit-per-week limit), and it certainly doesn’t negate the increased risk for cancers and liver disease that alcohol might cause. The guidelines also point out that rates of ischaemic heart disease have fallen over recent years, and therefore the absolute risk for heart disease is decreasing.

While these new guidelines might make slightly depressing January reading, they’ve long been in need of updating, and whether we like it or not, there is a risk to our health from consuming alcohol. It seems that any amount of alcohol will increase our risk of ill health, and it’s not the case that 14 units a week is safe, while 15 will be harmful. The risk to our health increases as consumption increases. Of course, how we weigh up that risk is up to ourselves as individuals. As stats hero Professor Sir David Spiegelhalter told the Science Media Centre “it all seems to come down to what pleasure you get from moderate drinking”.