Meet the giraffe that inspired cakes and pastries

Name: The Emperor’s giraffeSpecies: Giraffa camelopardalisDates: c. 1824-1829Claim to fame: First giraffe in AustriaWhere now: Unknown

In the late 1820s, the Pasha of Egypt Muhammad Ali sent three giraffes to Europe. This was no blind generosity, but a clever diplomatic manoeuvre. 

Under orders from Constantinople, the Pasha had sent troops to sustain the Turks in their efforts to keep Greece within the Ottoman Empire. In so doing, he risked alienating much of Greek-supporting Europe. A giraffe seemed like the obvious gift to smooth relations. He dispatched three.

The fate of the French and British giraffes have been explored in earlier Animal Magic posts (here and here). But the tale of the third giraffe, a specimen the Pasha sent to Emperor Franz I of Austria, is not so well known. 

Like the other calves, the giraffe destined for Austria was caught live in Nubia (yet to become part of Egypt), transported to Alexandria and set sail for Venice. The next step was less romantic. The poor animal had to trek across the Alps, with leather strappings around its hooves to protect it from the cold, slippery ground. 

In 1752, the Holy Roman Emperor Francis I founded an imperial menagerie within the grounds of the Schönbrunn Palace in Vienna. At first, the collection of live animals was reserved for the entertainment of the imperial family, but the ‘Tiergarten’ eventually opened on Sundays to the well-to-do citizens of Vienna. 

The giraffe, when it arrived in August 1828, caused a sensation, just as the Pasha’s animal gifts had done in France two years earlier and in England the previous year. Vienna treated its specimen as a VIP, constructing a purpose-built Biedermeier-style lodge, one that still houses giraffes to this day. The enthusiastic Viennese flocked to visit and the novelty triggered a mass cultural phenomenon. 

Whilst the giraffe was still on its way to Austria, the composer Adolf Bäuerle premiered a musical: ‘Die Giraffe in Wien’. Austrian women were soon styling their hair ‘à la Girafe’, wearing giraffe-patterned clothes, gloves and earrings, scenting themselves with ‘Esprit à la Girafe’ and even redecorating their boudoirs with special wallpaper. 

Three days after the animal’s arrival there was a great Giraffe Ball at the ‘Blue Grape’ inn at Penzing (now Vienna’s 14th district), at which young women received a bouquet of flowers topped with a giraffe’s head made from sugar. The giraffe’s keeper Hagi Ali Sciobari was the guest of honour. Two musical pieces were created for the occasion by Austrian composers: a ‘Giraffengalopp’ by Henri Herz and a ‘Giraffen-Rondeau’ by Wenzel Plachy. The upright harpsichord (Harfenklavier in German), which first appeared around 1798, became remarketed as the Giraffe-piano. Artisans manufactured special china and glass objects. The city’s cafés began producing ‘Giraffentorten’ and Viennese bakeries sold ‘Giraffeln’ pastries up until World War I. 

But there was something wrong with the wonderful animal. From the early drawings and paintings it is quite obvious the Austrian giraffe was doomed, its back legs protruding at an awkward, ominous angle. It died only eight months after its arrival. Based on a post-mortem, there was speculation that it had sustained fractures whilst strapped to a camel’s back in North Africa. The Alps crossing cannot have helped.

The giraffe’s skeleton went to the College of Veterinary Medicine and its skin entered the Natural History Museum of Vienna. There is no evidence that either of these remains has survived.

Tale Ends

If you would like to order a copy of Olivier Lebleu’s book Les Avatars de Zarafa – Chronique d’une Girafomania 1826-1830 (Arléa, Paris, 2006), please send an email to lesavatarsdezarafa@orange.fr

If there is a zoological specimen with a great story that you would like to see profiled, please contact Henry Nicholls @WayOfThePanda.