Pair are first to benefit from the 100,000 Genomes Project, launched in 2014 to improve diagnosis and treatment of rare genetic disorders and cancer

Doctors feared something was wrong the moment Georgia Walburn-Green was born. Her head was slightly larger than normal, but tests offered no explanation. The hospital’s advice to her parents was not encouraging. “We were just told to go home and see if our baby developed abnormally,” said her mother, Amanda.

Now aged four, it is clear that Georgia is not developing properly. As a baby, she struggled to hold her head up, look around the room, and sit upright. She has a kidney condition, growths in her eyes, and a disorder that means she may never speak. On top of this, despite dozens of invasive tests and scans, doctors could not diagnose her condition.

That changed two weeks before Christmas when Georgia’s family received a call from Great Ormond Street Hospital in London. Doctors there had finally identified the problem: a rare genetic mutation on a single gene. The diagnosis has transformed the family’s life. Knowing that they did not pass on the disease, Amanda and her husband, Matt, are now trying for a second baby.

Georgia, and another four-year-old girl called Jessica, are the first children to be diagnosed with rare diseases through the UK’s 100,000 Genomes Project. Both received diagnoses last month, ending years of uncertainty for them and their families. The £300m project was launched by David Cameron in 2014 to improve diagnoses and treatments of rare genetic disorders and cancer.

Researchers on the project compared DNA from the girls and their parents to find that each child had a fault in a single gene. Having identified the genetic defects, doctors can now test for them in other children who display the same developmental problems as Georgia or Jessica.

“We’ve got a long way to go before we really understand rare diseases and cancer, but we feel very hopeful that this is the beginning of something powerful and helpful,” said Maria Bitner-Glindzicz, a clinical geneticist at Great Ormond Street. While the diseases are individually rare, they are common as a group. Doctors have identified 7,000 rare genetic illnesses which affect one in 17 people in the UK.

When Georgia was born in June 2011, doctors noticed her head was slightly larger than normal and immediately took her for tests. “It was very distressing to go from that special and incredibly amazing moment of just having your first child to a doctor coming in and saying there’s a problem,” said Amanda, who works part time in advertising for House of Fraser. “All they kept saying was ‘Did you have all your scans? I said ‘Of course. They were all fine. What are you saying, that this baby shouldn’t have been born?’”

While Amanda’s friends had babies who developed normally, Georgia failed to meet developmental milestones. “I remember, night after night, just crying and searching ‘baby not lifting head’, or baby not doing this or that, trying to find somewhere for help and support and advice,” she said. Georgia was later diagnosed with a kidney condition, growths in her eyes, and verbal dyspraxia, meaning she may never talk.

Amanda heard about about the 100,000 Genomes Project through a support group called Syndromes Without a Name, or Swan. A year the family gave blood samples at Great Ormond Street, Bitner-Glindzicz phoned to say her team had discovered the genetic fault - a mutation in half a gene called Kdn5b.

Doctors are not sure how the mutation will affect Georgia in the years ahead, but the diagnosis means Georgia’s parents can complete forms needed for health insurance and special school services. Amanda and Matt were told that if Georgia’s condition was inherited, their next baby had a one-in-four chance of having the same disorder. For that reason, they had held off having another baby.

“I’m 38 now. If the NHS hadn’t invested in genetics and this study hadn’t started, that would have been it. Five years’ time would have been too late for us,” Amanda said.

Lyn Chitty, the overall clinical lead for the North Thames Genomic Medical Centre, said: “She can now have a baby with relative confidence that she’s not going to have another affected child. And because we have the genetic change, we can do a test in pregnancy if she wants, to reassure her. It is life changing.”

The second girl to receive a diagnosis, Jessica, seemed healthy at birth, but she failed to develop properly and began to have seizures when she turned one. After a raft of invasive tests came back negative, doctors told her parents, Kate and Simon, that Jessica had an undiagnosed condition. Two years after giving blood samples for the 100,000 Genomes Project, the hospital called to say they had identified a mutation in one of Jessica’s genes. The fault caused a condition called Glut1 deficiency syndrome in which the brain cannot get enough energy to function properly.

In Jessica’s case, there is a good chance her condition will improve if she follows a special diet, allowing doctors to reduce her medication and hopefully enabling her epilepsy to be more easily controlled.

“We had always been worried that something preventable happened during the pregnancy or at birth to cause Jessica’s problems and it was such a relief to know there’s nothing we could have done differently,” said Jessica’s mother, Kate.

The diagnoses mean that both families are likely to find others whose children test positive for the same mutations in future.

“People often are concerned about research, they are hesitant about getting involved,” said Bitner-Glindzicz. “But the aim of research is to move forwards and be able to offer better diagnoses and better treatments. We don’t want to be where we are now in 20 years time. We want to be further on.”