He was written out of Tom Hooper’s The Danish Girl, but doctor and sexual rights campaigner Magnus Hirschfeld has a legacy even the Nazis couldn’t destroy



In the spring of 1930, Danish artist Einar Wegener arrived in Berlin for a consultation that he hoped would both save and change his life. 

Wegener had spent the previous twenty years dressing as a woman, Lili Elbe. In public, his wife, painter Gerda Gottlieb, introduced Elbe as Wegener’s sister . But by 1930 he could not bear his double life any longer. He resolved to commit suicide, even naming a date – May 1.

Instead, Wegener made a different choice, electing to undergo a series of pioneering gender reassignment operations, transitioning into Lili Ilse Elvenes, better known as Lili Elbe. Elbe’s extraordinary story remains controversial; indeed, the film The Danish Girl, starring Eddie Redmayne and based on Elbe’s life was this week banned from Qatari cinemas after protests about its “depravity”. 

Elbe’s revolutionary transition would not have been possible without the contribution of the sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld, a man who had become both renowned and notorious across Europe for his groundbreaking research into human gender and sexuality.

While Elbe’s posthumous 1933 biography, “Man into Woman: The First Sex Change”, made her story internationally famous, Hirschfeld is a less well-known figure today. As both a Jew and gay activist, much of his legacy was burnt to ashes when his Institute for Sexual Research was targeted by a Nazi attack in 1933. But through colleagues and pupils, his work has gone on to transform the way we view sexual minorities and has helped make gender reassignment surgery the widely accepted procedure it is today.

Hirschfeld was born on 14 May 1868 in the city of Kolberg, in what was then Prussia. He grew up intending to study literature before turning to medicine as it provided better career prospects. 

While many gay men at the time accepted their second-class legal status, Hirschfeld, himself a secret homosexual, was appalled at the prevailing attitudes of society and the medical community towards what was then termed “sexual degeneracy”.’ In one medical school lecture he attended, a man who had been imprisoned in an asylum for 30 years for committing homosexual acts was paraded naked in front of the students. Hirschfeld was revolted at this degrading treatment of a patient, describing it as being tantamount to that of a lab animal.

Once qualified as a doctor in the mid-1890s, his resolve to specialise in treating what he referred to as “sexual suffering” was strengthened by two events. The first was the trial and subsequent imprisonment of the playwright Oscar Wilde in 1895, on the charge of sodomy, something he believed was a horrifying act of injustice. 

The second was the suicide of one of his patients, a lieutenant who shot himself the day before his wedding. He left Hirschfeld a letter which read, “Please could you educate the public on the bad fate of people like me who are not fit for marriage. Please tell the public everything about us.”

Hirschfeld’s conservative Jewish family were deeply unhappy with his chosen field, pleading with him to specialise in something more respectable, such as cholera. Hirschfeld replied, “What are you saying: that cholera brings you more joy than sexuality?” 

In 1897, he founded the Scientific Humanitarian Committee, bringing together individuals from across the world to promote education and research into sexuality, with the hope of ending prejudice against homosexuals and eventually abolishing Paragraph 175 of the German penal code, which criminalised homosexuality. 

But to truly challenge the law of the time, Hirschfeld needed to prove that homosexuality was a biological phenomenon rather than a depraved state of mind, as it was perceived at the time. He needed scientific results.

He began to research the causes and nature of homosexuality, and as his reputation spread, increasing numbers of male patients came to him seeking advice. He encouraged them to get in touch with Berlin’s LGBT community and established a weekly society where those unhappy with their sexuality could meet and discuss their feelings. “In many ways, he was the father of the self-help group,” says Ralf Dose, author of a recent biography of Hirschfeld.

Hirschfeld’s methods were unusual for a doctor of his era. He believed that careful observation and talking at length with patients, often over long walks were vital to establishing a theory. He began collecting data by administering a questionnaire to every patient who visited him. 

Through these questionnaires, he soon came to the realisation that gender was far from binary, as had been previously assumed, and that in fact the divisions between men and women were intricate and complex. 

In 1919 he established the world’s first Institute for Sexual Science in Berlin, something which would make him famous across Europe over the following decade. The rich and intellectual elite of Europe, from movie stars to poets such as W.H.Auden, came to visit the museum linked to the institute and which contained everything from sex education information to the institute’s research into transsexuality.

“At that time due to inflation and the German economy, Berlin was a very cheap place, so high society flocked there,” Dose said. “They easily found out about this famous museum with all these shocking things. For visitors to Berlin at that time, it was a must-see.” 

 Hirschfeld was also an excellent networker. He supported the making of a 1919 film called Different from the Others (Anders als die Andern) about homosexuality, which polarised German society. He was also a prolific lecture-giver, promoting his ideas by delivering over 200 talks a year to thousand-strong audiences.

“He was one of the few people who spoke so publicly and openly about these kinds of things,” Dose said. “Someone who would give interviews, talks and publish articles about ideas which went completely against societal norms. And it enhanced his research as anyone secretly thinking, ‘What’s wrong with me?’ could very easily find him.” 

As a result of his fame, he became a consultant for many of the pioneering gender reassignment procedures taking place in Germany. While Hirschfeld was perhaps the most well-known German sexologist, he was far from the only one. The first transgender operation of any kind took place in 1912 on a female painter who believed she was a man, and underwent the removal of both breasts and ovaries.

The same year, the Austrian professor Eugen Steinach had transplanted ovaries into male guinea pigs which had been castrated in infancy, and performing a reverse procedure on females. He noted that at puberty, the males showed no interest in females and displayed the growth of breasts and nipples.

It would be decades until scientists would isolate the male and female sex hormones oestrogen and testosterone, but throughout the 1920s, many of these experimental procedures were performed on humans, with the first neovagina graft taking place in 1921. 

These operations were extremely risky, but Hirschfeld noted the extreme desperation of many patients, some of whom would threaten to mutilate their own sex organs until a surgeon agreed to perform the procedure. 

By the time Hirschfeld met Elbe in 1930, he was well acquainted with the extremes that many patients were willing to go to in order to change their gender. By now, Hirschfeld’s original questionnaire, designed to document the realm of transsexuality, had expanded to 130 questions and he had collected data across tens of thousands of individuals. 

Elbe was reportedly disgusted by the questionnaire and the ambiguity of transsexuality as it was represented in the institute. “He described being requested to answer all these very rude and strict questions,” says Rainer Herrn, a sexology researcher at Charité hospital in Berlin. “He refused the descriptions of sexual intermediates such as transvestites and hermaphrodites, it was not acceptable for him. For him, there was no ambiguity, he was a woman. So he was very irritated by the whole process.”

Nothing has survived of the exact discussions between Elbe and Hirschfeld, but under Hirschfeld’s supervision, Elbe underwent surgery for removal of the testicles in Berlin, before three further operations in Dresden. The final and fatal procedure was a womb transplant, many decades before the development of medicines to prevent organ rejection. Elbe died of heart failure on 13 September 1931. 

“[Elbe] wanted to have implanted ovaries and a uterus because at that time, to be a real woman, you have to be capable of having children,” Hern says. “That was [her] ideal, [she] was obsessed by this. In [Elbe]’s biography which is based on her diaries, [she] always fantasises about being a ‘complete woman.’” 

Little is known about how Hirschfeld reacted to the news of Elbe’s death. By that time he had left Germany on a world speaking tour, from which he would never return. Over the past decade his resolutely outspoken stance on homosexuality and transsexual rights and status as a Jew had cultivated increasingly powerful enemies. 

In 1921, he was badly beaten in the street after giving a public lecture in Munich. Such was the severity of his injuries that journalists at the scene mistakenly assumed he was dead, and a few days later he read his own obituary whilst travelling from Munich to Berlin. 

“There were many other Jewish sexologists at this time but none were persecuted to quite the same extent,” Dose says. “Such was Hirschfeld’s presence in the media of the time, it was almost propaganda work in the defence of the sexual rights of minorities. But many found him highly offensive as a result, and he attracted the hatred of the Nazis and their supporters.”

In the Nazi newspapers Der Stürmer (The Attacker) and Völkischer Beobachter (Völkisch Observer), Hirschfeld was portrayed as a central enemy throughout the 1920s. In 1928, he founded the World League for Sexual Reform, holding conferences across the world, something the Nazis widely denounced as a global Jewish conspiracy. “They portrayed him as a subversive of the German morale, undermining the German spirit as both a Jew and a sexologist,” Herrn says.

While away speaking in China in 1930, Hirschfeld was warned by his colleagues not to return to Germany as his life would be in danger. His institute was plundered by the Nazis on May 6 1933; his work and belongings were burned four days later.

Hirschfeld travelled first to Switzerland and then to Paris, where he tried without success to re-establish his institute. He died of a heart attack in Nice in May 1935. 

 Hirschfeld’s name would have almost certainly faded into obscurity were it not for his lover, Li Shiu Tong, who he met in 1930 and who preserved many of his books. His ideas and research breakthroughs were also taken to the United States by his student Harry Benjamin, who built on the results of Hirschfeld’s original questionnaire to establish the Benjamin scale of sex orientation, published in 1966.

“My view is that Hirschfeld’s biggest contribution was to introduce this idea of the many intermediate stages between men and women which we are still exploring to this day,” Dose says. “He sought to dissolve this myth that gender was binary and to give sexual minorities a voice for the first time.” 

The Danish Girl is in cinemas now.