The Danish Girl | Joy | Le Mépris | At Any Price | The Fall Of The Krays | Sleeping With Other People

The radical story of one of the first post-operative transgender women is played as conventionally as possible here – which is either a failed ironic ploy or simply a failure of imagination. Set in 1920s Denmark, it’s a movie of great taste and elegance, all the better to set off Redmayne’s androgynous beauty. But unlike Koch’s experimentally minded surgeon, we never really get under the skin of his Lili Elbe, formerly known as the artist Einar Wegener. The strain on his wife (Vikander) is conveyed more effectively, but this is a drama marred not so much by political correctness as stifling politeness.

A story about a bestselling mop that’s difficult to get a handle on. The familiar Russell elements are all in place here – his regular actors, emotional family life, moments of wacky comedy – but there’s a hallucinatory, episodic quality to it that doesn’t quite gel. Lawrence has her work cut out holding together her fractious family, her rising mop business and a somewhat sprawling story.

Godard’s celebrated “mainstream” movie, which ponders the compromises of making mainstream movies. There’s so much more to it than industry critique and clever nods to Homer, though. Business mixes with displeasure as Piccoli and Bardot’s marriage falls apart.

A suspiciously belated release for the 99 Homes director’s earlier drama. It’s aimed squarely at the American heartlands, with its tale of a struggling Iowa farmer and a son who would rather race cars than follow in Dad’s tractor marks. Some unlikely plot turns nudge it off-target.

You probably need another Krays movie like a bullet to the head, but here we go again. This is presumably for those who were left unfulfilled by Tom Hardy’s two-for-one performance in Legend and Adler’s own, similarly low-budget and violence-wallowing The Rise Of The Krays.

Can a sexually compatible man and woman be good, platonic friends? Does that question ring any bells? This isn’t quite a When Harry Met Sally update, but when Sudeikis and Brie’s former lovers meet again as messed-up sex addicts and attempt to be celibate buddies, the film is ultimately headed down a familiar romcom street.

Yakuza Apocalypse Gangsters, vampires and kung-fu frogs are all in Takashi Miike’s irreverent horror-comedy mix. Wed only

The Hateful Eight Quentin Tarantino holes up a group of twitchy bounty hunters in a snowy cabin for his latest neo-western, Kurt Russell, Samuel L Jackson, Jennifer Jason Leigh and Tim Roth among them.

A War Accomplished and intelligent Danish interrogation of the Afghanistan war, and the strife it brings for one soldier both abroad and back home.

Partisan Vincent Cassel plays the volatile leader of an isolated cult, one of whose young recruits starts to have doubts.

Bolshoi Babylon Documentary lifting the curtain on Russia’s troubled ballet company, in the wake of the 2013 acid attack on its artistic director.

Sanam Teri Kasam Hindi romance marking the Bollywood debut of Pakistani actor Mawra Hocane.

In two weeks... Leonardo DiCaprio vs bear-infested wilderness in The Revenant… Rocky turns trainer for boxing contender Creed…

In three weeks... Ravishing China-set epic The Assassin… Financial crash tale The Big Short…

In a month... Journalists expose Catholic church abuse in Spotlight… Michael Caine and Harvey Keitel in Sorrentino’s Youth…