Rolf de Heer’s curious mixture of entertainment and anthropology represented the first full-length Australian feature spoken entirely in Indigenous language.

Is it right for non-Indigenous film-makers to tell Indigenous stories? The question has generated some debate over the years, notably in the Australian film industry in the aftermath of director Fred Schepisi’s uncompromising racially-charged revenge drama The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith in 1978.

The debate is a thorny one, but most would agree a consensus has emerged: if outsiders make a film about Indigenous people they should do so only after extensive community consultation and engaging in genuine intercultural exchange.

Dutch-born Australian auteur Rolf de Heer has a history in making oddball films exploring alternative people and lifestyles, his most notorious a cult classic about a deranged man-child with wild hair and a famous affection for cling wrap: the inimitable Bad Boy Bubby. The film-maker also has a history in shared authorship and extensive on and off screen collaboration with his subjects.

De Heer’s moving 1998 drama Dance Me to My Song was co-written by cerebral palsy-afflicted disability activist Heather Rose, who also acted in the lead role. 2013’s character and cultural study Charlie’s Country stars his old friend and colleague David Gulpilil, also co-writer and whose life – like Rose’s – provided inspiration for the story. 

The origins of 2006’s Ten Canoes – one of de Heer’s most distinct and memorable films – can also be traced back to the veteran actor. Gulpilil extended several invitations to de Heer to make a film in his hometown (Ramingining, Northern Territory) and with his people (the Yolngu people).

The result is the first full-length Australian feature spoken entirely in Indigenous language (though three different versions of the film exists and are all on the DVD – one of which is narrated in English). And what a film it is: a comedy, romance and action-infused period piece, equal parts history lesson and pure, giddy fiction. 

Ten Canoes unfolds in playful self-conscious style. Buoyed by a jubilant non-professional cast, the film bounces between the prosaic and profound – waxing philosophical one moment, taking the mickey out of itself the next – providing vivid insights into Aboriginal culture on a macro level (constructing canoes, going hunting etc) and in big, broad mythological strokes. 

Gulpilil’s cheeky audience-ribbing narration (which takes place in the present) is broken up by rhetorical questions and spontaneous bursts of giggles. As we watch gliding aerial camerawork following a river winding through the Arafura wetlands, he introduces us to a story about 10 of his ancestors, who he says have “too many names to remember”.

A group of men are on the hunt for magpie goose eggs. They gossip and joke, all knowing Dayindi (Jamie Gulpilil, David’s son) has affections for a pretty young wife of one of his older brothers. The leader Minygululu (Peter Minygululu) sits him down to tell a cautionary tale about another man long ago who fell for his brother’s wife. 

This leads to a third timeframe, a story-within-a-story-within-a-story that takes place in a mythical period presented in black and white. De Heer and co-director Peter Djigirr, a key member of the Arafura swamp people, mix a myriad of visual techniques, from point-of-view shots to aerial images and close-ups of cast members smiling into the lens. Turning these lush awe-inspiring settings to monochrome feels vaguely criminal, but the film looks beautiful throughout. 

Levity is a big part of their approach. How many films have you seen with Indigenous Australians making penis and fart jokes thousands of years ago? The directors use comedy to highlight shared human experiences, generally in the form of small grievances, quirky character traits and unanticipated mishaps. 

It is warming and funny but also witty and at times unexpectedly dry. When two tribesmen discover they speared the wrong person, one of them – a man with a huge bulbous belly and an addiction to honey – remarks that “his shit still stinks”. The other responds: “Wrong stink from wrong stranger.”

Ten Canoes is a strange beast, both ethnographic document and high-spirited flight of whimsy: a curious mixture of entertainment and anthropology. Any notion that this is “high” or “low” art can be quickly dispelled; this is quintessentially a film about people and storytelling.

You could say Ten Canoes is a reflection on oral history: how culture can be transmitted by spoken word generation to generation and what bits might be kept or lost in that process. But its jokey tone suggests something less pretentious: an ode to a good old-fashioned well-spun yarn.