Hive-CM8 says the illegal release has created ‘a new type of media hype’ and argues that the controversy will help push sales at the box office

The piracy group behind the illegal release of Quentin Tarantino’s latest movie, The Hateful Eight, has apologised for leaking the western on to the web for free before it hit US cinemas.

Hive-CM8, which also released James Bond movie Spectre and awards-season contender The Big Short illegally, issued an apology in which the organisation expressed sorrow for any harm caused, and suggested the attendant publicity surrounding the leak of a high-quality screener copy of the film might, in fact, help The Hateful Eight at the box office.

“Sorry to disappoint – but there was no hack or any such thing,” the group said. “We got the copies sold from a guy on the street, no decryption was needed. We were definitely not the only ones. Couple other movies have been on the net days before, not done from us. So we wanted to share this movie with the people who are not rich enough or not able to watch all nominated movies in the cinema.”

Hive-CM8 insisted it had always encouraged those who download its movies to view them at the cinema, and promised not to release films prior to their theatrical release date in future. “We never intended to hurt anyone by doing that,” the statement continues. “We didn’t know it would get that popular that quickly.

“The Hateful Eight is an excellent, thrilling and entertaining western that combines terrific direction, a fantastic cast, a wonderful script, beautiful photography and a memorable score. All of those elements make The Hateful Eight an unforgettable film that is Quentin Tarantino at his best.

“We actually think this has created a new type of media hype … because everyone is talking about it and everyone wants to see the movie that created so much noise. This will push the cinema tickets sale for sure … We really hope this helped out the producers in the long run.”

The Hateful Eight opened in Tarantino’s preferred 70mm format on limited release in 100 cinemas in the US and Canada on Christmas Day, and has since expanded early to a wide release over the past week. 

So far, the western appears to be struggling in comparison to recent efforts from the cult film-maker. Inglourious Basterds and Django Unchained took $38m and $30.1m respectively after one week on release, while The Hateful Eight has posted $29.6m after two weeks.

Producer and regular Tarantino collaborator Harvey Weinstein has refused to lay the blame at the door of pirates, instead citing the huge success of Star Wars: The Force Awakens, which has rocketed to $740m in receipts over the past three weeks and is set to surpass Avatar as the highest-grossing film of all time in North America by midweek. 

“We’re living in a Star Wars universe,” Weinstein told Variety. “I love Star Wars. I think it’s great. It’s not sour grapes, but if I’m writing a memo to myself, I would say: Do not open against Star Wars. Do not open against the biggest movie of all time. We would have doubled the gross without Star Wars.”

The leak of The Hateful Eight was traced last month via a digital watermark to a DVD sent to Hollywood producer Andrew Kosove, co-CEO of the film production and finance company Alcon Entertainment. Kosove, who is cooperating with an FBI investigation into the leak, has denied the disc ever reached him.