Total global dominance eludes Star Wars Episode VII, while Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight is his worst wide US debut

Three weekends along on Star Wars: The Force Awakens, we’re in a much better position to place bets on its final box-office tally. Unpredecented US grosses for weekends one, two and three mean that Avatar’s all-time US record of $760.8m (unadjusted for inflation) is as good as toast, probably by tomorrow or Wednesday. And this will have happened in about a quarter of the time James Cameron’s blockbuster took to reach that point. The pace is astonishing, particularly for the normally sedate December period, but the reason is searingly obvious: being the latest in the world’s most-vaunted film franchise would always be in its favour. Just more so than we expected.

What’s worth digging deeper into is its overseas performance, slightly fogged by the fact that Disney for some reason won’t confirm exactly how many territories it’s playing in. Is this defensiveness due to it looking increasingly likely that The Force Awakens won’t pass Avatar ($2.8bn) for the all-time worldwide crown? Taking $900m-1bn in the US and a national-record-high $400m-plus haul in China, where it opens on 9 January, would put it in with a shot. But the fact remains that its American stronghold is not displaying the indefatigable stamina shown by Avatar; overseas, this weekend’s take is already under $100m, a figure the Cameron film exceeded for six consecutive frames. 

We looked at possible reasons for Avatar’s unparalleled success a fortnight ago when The Force Awakens opened. Now that the latter has shown its hand, one thing that stands out is that where it is rock-solid in the western heartlands (the UK, $145m running total; Germany, $81.4m; France, $67.4m; Australia, $50.7m – four territories that consistently placed second to fifth for George Lucas’s prequels), the one big change is Japan. Top territory for Episodes I-III, it has now slipped to fourth place ($52.9m). Is it possible the Japanese respond to Star Wars primarily as a forward-looking sci-fi franchise and that Episode VII’s swooning yet carefully calculated nostalgia, gathering around western actors, is less appealing there? That might also explain why box office in other developing territories (Mexico, $24.5m; South Korea, $23.1m; Russia, $22.9m; Brazil, $21.2m) is good but not the overwhelming victory you might expect from a Star Wars franchise. Barring a galactic take in China, that could decide things in Avatar’s favour.

The Weinstein Company was cranking up its damage-limitation machine this weekend, insisting to Variety that the omnipotent The Force Awakens was responsible for Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight only making $16.2m on its US wide release. Adjusted for inflation, it’s his worst wide opening ever. The Weinsteins are probably correct, but the responsibility is theirs for choosing to open against the Disney behemoth. Like everyone, they probably underestimated how much air the blockbuster was going to suck out of the market, believing the Tarantino western could function as effective counter-programming. But even coupled with a set of reviews with a weary-sounding undertone, Tarantino doesn’t need to fret too much. He’s sure to pick up fanboy stragglers who’ve hitherto only had eyes for Star Wars, giving The Hateful Eight legs. The film is, at $62m, his cheapest for a while – less risky than the $100m Django Unchained, which, with a $30m debut, didn’t fly out of the gate either. In truth, Tarantino has never been the biggest opener, but that doesn’t stop him accumulating impressive box office. Such is his reputation, and his ability to finish pulp material with an auteurish gloss, that he now commands almost blockbuster-size grosses – these days because he almost always hits the mark internationally, too. Both Django and Inglourious Basterds did over $200m overseas, taking them to $425.4m and $321.5m respectively. The Hateful Eight starts the fightback in over 20 countries this weekend.

All the talk is of how the game-changing The Force Awakens is going to change the game for future December releases. In many ways, though, the monumental scale of its box office apart, it continues the trend of recent years: the monopolisation of the Christmas period by blockbuster-grade material (previously the Hobbit films). That has made life tough for that other seasonal staple: children’s entertainment. The fourth Alvin and the Chipmunks (The Road Chip), currently on $91.6m globally, looks to be continuing a pattern of franchise fall-off; Fox’s well-reviewed The Peanuts Movie is just about starting to pull its weight overseas ($77.1m of a $205.9m total take) without dazzling anyone. There hasn’t, though, been a December-dominating kids’-targeted release since The Chronicles of Narnia in 2005 and Night at the Museum in 2006. It feels as if the studios have started to neglect the Christmas children’s market, happy to fling endless sequels down the pipe rather than develop original material. Harry Potter – usually released in November – credibly filled the slot for a decade, but since then we’ve only had the third instalments of Alvin and the Chipmunks (Chipwrecked, 2011) and Night at the Museum (Secret of the Tomb, 2014). And no major children’s releases in 2012 and 2013. Both aforementioned threequels made well over $300m, so the market is obviously still there. The quality, though, less so.

One person holding off The Force Awakens’ death march is toothy Italian comedy star Checco Zalone. His Quo Vado?, about a southern dosser desperate to hold on to a cushy bureaucratic job, opened to $24.2m (higher than Rentrak’s initial estimate below) – a debut record for the country and better than The Force Awakens’ entire-three-week take. Zalone, working with director Gennaro Nunziante, has monstered Italian box office in recent years: Che Bella Giornata and Sole a Catinelle, the duo’s second and third films, were local champions in 2011 and 2013 respectively. Quo Vado? looks nailed down to beat the latter’s record for homegrown films ($69.9m) and possibly Avatar’s overall one ($71.5m), too.

Elsewhere, this week mostly saw a barrage of local Chinese hits making merry pre-Star Wars. Comedy megastar Wang Baoqiang (of 2012’s indie breakout Lost in Thailand) obviously has a thing for Bangkok, returning to it for this week’s caper Detective Chinatown. In second place globally with $45m, the film suggests that Thailand is becoming to China what Las Vegas is to America: anything goes. Already on release, drag-racing action-comedy Mr Six and tomb-raiding thriller Mojin continued to hold their own in the global top 10, the latter now the fifth most successful film in China with $230.8m so far. Lower down the worldwide chart, animation Little Door Gods – about out-of-favour deities canvassing the mortal world for new followers – entered at 16th place with $10m; rising actors Shen Teng and Ma Li managed 19th with $7m for comedy Heart for Heaven, following up Goodbye Mr Loser, their September hit; Donnie Yen, playing the much-chronicled Bruce Lee trainer Ip Man for a third time, struck a $5m blow for 21st on the chart.

Not listed, as ever with Bollywood releases, were India’s two Christmas biggies. The execrable reviews for Shah Rukh Khan vehicle Dilwale have begun to count against it: the film has dropped back to R138 crore ($20.7m) against lavish extramarital period drama Bajirao Mastani’s R150 crore. Star Wars, just to give you some idea of the cultural odds stacked against it, was hovering somewhere near the R15 crore mark.

Disney must be feeling pretty smug, but The Force Awakens’ Chinese bow on Saturday – with Star Wars a little-known quantity in the country – will give the conglomerate a stronger idea of how aggressive its expansion strategy will have to be as the extended franchise develops over the next decade. It has, to be fair, been busting a gut in China over the last few weeks – roping in singer-actor Lu Han to act as “Star Wars” ambassador. (Though, presumably, at 25 years old, he’s in need of just as much education as the rest of the country’s youth demographic.) Other than that, very little of worldwide import is happening – apart from The Hateful Eight starting out on the international trail, already mentioned above.

1. Star Wars: The Force Awakens, $184.6m from approximately 75 territories. $1.51bn cumulative – 51% international; 49% US2. (New) Detective Chinatown, $45m from 1 territory. $58m cum – 100% int3. Mr Six, $32.3m from 2 territories. $93.1m cum – 98.9% int; 1.1% US4. Daddy’s Home, $38.2m from 16 territories. $115.6m cum – 18.9% int; 81.1% US5. Mojin: The Lost Legend, $32m from 3 territories. $230.8m cum – 99.6% int; 0.4% US6. Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip, $22.1m from 17 territories. $91.6m cum – 26.5% int; 73.5% US7. (New) Quo Vado?, $20m from 1 territory – 100% int8. Joy, $19.7m from 29 territories. $51.8m cum – 25.3% int; 74.7% US9. The Peanuts Movie, $17.4m from 45 territories. $205.9m cum – 37.4% int; 62.6% US10. The Hateful Eight, $16.2m from 1 territory. $29.6m cum – 100% US