Snowbound western The Hateful Eight marks Tarantino’s quarter-century as a director. We ask his stars what makes the maestro tick

Seems like old times: eight people in a room – seven men, one woman – all of them suspicious of one another’s motives and deceits, all of them talkative and foul-mouthed, most of them with a propensity for brutal violence and, in consequence, only a short time left to live.

Old times here means 1992’s Reservoir Dogs, Quentin Tarantino’s directorial debut, that quintessential 90s independent movie, now edging towards its quarter-centenary. And new times means The Hateful Eight, Tarantino’s latest, in which that bare, white-walled warehouse in the aftermath of a botched jewellery heist is replaced by an isolated, snowbound stagecoach stopover named Minnie’s Haberdashery (here all the white is on the outside, an endless blanketing snowstorm), the richly and intricately production-designed setting for a night of paranoia, suspicion and accusation, leading to maximum bloodletting in Tarantino’s characteristically orgasmic fashion.

The colour-coded thieves in matching black suits, men in their 20s and 30s, have meanwhile given way to a grizzled, older, but no less archetypal crowd of classic western figures – dubbed by Tarantino thus: the bounty hunter (Samuel L Jackson), the prisoner (Jennifer Jason Leigh), the hangman (Kurt Russell), the sheriff (Walton Goggins), the little man (Tim Roth), the cow puncher (Michael Madsen) and the Confederate (Bruce Dern). They are clad in huge furs and hats, wearing impressive beards and moustaches, and in their 40s to 60s. Reservoir Dogs, very much a young film-maker’s calling-card movie, ran for a crisp 99 minutes; The Hateful Eight, from the hand of a seasoned master (some, of course, would disagree), runs for three hours and two minutes, with overture and intermission.

Quentin Tarantino, 52 years of age, erstwhile upstart, a onetime one-man revolution from below, has entered middle age along with his creations.

So how does an upstart age? “He hasn’t so much aged as matured,” says Tim Roth, back in the Tarantino fold for the first time since Pulp Fiction in 1994, and possessed of the longest QT memory of the three repeat offenders I talk to – the others being Goggins and Russell. As one of the original suits in Reservoir Dogs he can gauge the distance the director has travelled in two decades. “His ability as a film-maker was always very high anyway,” says Roth.

“He’d been making films in his head for a long time before 1992. The environment on Hateful Eight was very different from Dogs: everybody working hard, incredible focus, no cellphones on set. But it’s still like a circus: music playing, lots of games, laughter, tellling stories. The most obvious change in him is in that vast knowledge of film he has that just increases over time. On Reservoir Dogs there was no money, obviously, and one set was all he had. Now he has the budget and the wherewithal to actually tell stories the way he wants to. And as he has matured, his stuff has become more literary; it’s more novel-like than even Pulp Fiction, though that was novelistic primarily in its structure. And his writing is becoming denser and more layered, which is an interesting transformation.”

Roth insists that the structural echoes between the two movies are also deliberate: “That’s intentional, there’s a nod to the 90s – we came up in the 90s during that independent era, and Jennifer really took off then as well. It’s kinda decade-specific, and there’s a full-circle nod to one’s origins as well.”

Origins have always been important to Tarantino, not just the materials and genres and movies that he lovingly references, homages, cops and outright steals, but also the careers of the actors he chooses. He casts your past as much as he casts you. In Reservoir Dogs he chose ex-criminal and writer Edward Bunker and the famously volatile 40s noir thug Laurence Tierney for their evocative qualities and chequered personal histories. They also came on the cheap. In the case of Kurt Russell, that on-screen past is both rich and fully mined. It extends all the way back to the classic TV western dramas – The High Chaparral, Bonanza, The Virginian, Gunsmoke – the dramas Tarantino savoured as a child (he was named after Burt Reynolds’s character Quint Asper in Gunsmoke).

The child actor Russell guest-starred at one time or another in most of these dramas, and together they inspired The Hateful Eight itself (they always had a one-room hostage-situation episode or two each season). Factor in Russell’s 10-year contract with Disney as a teenager, the John Carpenter-era self-satirising action-hero Kurt of The Thing (which, in its extreme paranoia and ground-breaking violence, bears a distinct resemblance to The Hateful Eight) and Escape From New York. And let’s not forget the Kurt who appeared in his first movie, It Happened At The World’s Fair, alongside Elvis Presley, and did his last work in television, in 1977, actually playing Elvis Presley, superbly (Tarantino, lest we forget, himself once played an Elvis impersonator on The Golden Girls). None of this gets past Tarantino.

Working with him for the second time (the first as Snake Plissken-like stuntman Mike McKay in 2007’s Death Proof), Russell feels that the director “is currently in his creative prime. It’s like being with Orson Welles in the Mercury Theatre then going off to Hollywood to make Citizen Kane. Welles had his prime early, they say. Quentin is having his right now.”

Russell didn’t concern himself too much with which parts of his back catalogue Tarantino was plugging into; he brought his own grab-bag of ageing tough guys. “For me in The Hateful Eight, I had things in mind like Broderick Crawford, Jason Robards, Jack Bergman from Big Trouble In Little China, John Wayne: you can plug into these voices, depending on certain rhythms in the dialogue. But him looking at me? Quentin’s looking at layers, layers of reasons. Doing all those westerns back then connected me to that time in a way that Quentin feels strongly about.”

Russell, Roth and Goggins agree that the older Tarantino is writing at a new pitch of richness, and power; all three say the second viewing of The Hateful Eight is the charm (they’re correct), and that once its mysteries are resolved, the earlier scenes increase exponentially in complexity. If they signed on for anything, they agree, it was for the language.

Goggins was remembered by Tarantino from the innocent boy he played in The Apostle 20 years ago, but it’s also his performance as Boyd Crowder in Justified, the show that sealed his reputation, which brought him to this point. “Being in Elmore Leonard’s world, and with my character being as loquacious as he was, as thoughtful and specific – those are things that Quentin really gravitated to. Boyd Crowder embodied a lot of things that Quentin already has in his stories: his humour, his verbiage, how he handles words. Either you come in with 80% of it, or you don’t. And if you do get it, it’s what he does with that last 20% of you that really turns your performance into a Tarantino performance.”

Roth believes Tarantino was originally drawn to him not because of the twitchy psychos he played in the 1980s – Made In Britain, The Hit – but for his work in Robert Altman’s Vincent And Theo, and for his handling of Tom Stoppard’s linguistic gymnastics in Rosencrantz And Guildenstern Are Dead. “It’s the language that counts for Quentin,” he says. “He loves words – surprise, surprise! – and he can quote Rosencrantz at me better than I can!”

Russell, too, loves the song-like qualities of Tarantino’s dialogue. “These days he’s letting his literate muscle flex. You no longer hear that smart-ass, movie-crazy kid hiding behind the dialogue. His rhythms are extreme and perfect. They inform what he wants the audience to feel, and people are hearing the music almost more than the words, but the music comes out of the words. It’s actually easy to learn to play, that’s what he’s great at: easy-to-learn dialogue that tracks. He’s great at people talking to each other. And the depth of it, the possibilites … this screenplay has tentacles that reach out in a bunch of different directions. You can start prying away at it and find a lot of things that might offer different explanations of what’s going on. That’s part of the fun.”

For it all to work, Roth adds: “I think you definitely have to connect with his writing, identify with that music, the humour, and also the politics. There are people who just don’t get it, and that’s fair enough. Famously, Will Smith didn’t want to do Django, he just didn’t see himself in that world. Which worked out nicely for Jamie Foxx!”

“He’s not mellower,” is Russell’s final word. “He’s smarter. He has more tools now in his bag to make movies with. He has the control he needs. He doesn’t compete against himself, he knows that he just wants to continue to build his universe for the audience. He’s better than on Death Proof in 2007, more focused, more fun – really funny – a better communicator, and, by the way, he’s seen tons more stuff.”

The Hateful Eight is in UK cinemas from Friday 8 January