Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Jurassic World, Avengers: Age of Ultron, Minions and Fast &amp; Furious 7 post more than $1bn each

Cinemas across the globe pulled in a record $38bn in 2015, thanks largely to huge gains in China and an unprecedented $11bn haul in the US.

Blockbusters Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Jurassic World, Avengers: Age of Ultron, Minions and Fast & Furious 7 each posted more than $1bn worldwide, the first time that five movies have done so in a calendar year. A further eight films – Spectre, Inside Out, Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation, The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2, The Martian, Fifty Shades of Grey, Cinderella and Ant-Man – passed $500m.

Jurassic World remains the year’s highest-grossing film, with $1.67bn in receipts, though The Force Awakens is likely to end up the biggest film released in 2015. Abrams’ movie is currently in third place, with a haul of $1.510bn, just behind Fast & Furious 7’s $1.515bn.

China’s $6.78bn total was a staggering 48.7% up on 2014’s figure, as the world’s second-largest box office continued to grow at an impressive rate. The globe’s most populous nation is now expected to overtake North America as cinema’s highest-grossing territory as early as 2017, though doubts persist as to the accuracy of accounting.

In September, the homegrown fantasy Monster Hunt was hailed as the highest-grossing film of all time in China, with 2.428bn yuan ($379m) in receipts. But last month the film was accused of manipulating its box-office figures in order to break the record. The respected Hollywood trade site Box Office Mojo has removed Monster Hunt’s listing from its pages, and stated that it will no longer update Chinese box-office results due to the absence of “consistent and accurate” data.

Cinema does appear to be enjoying something of a renaissance worldwide, even if fewer films are providing the bulk of the profits. Variety reports that 2015’s top 10 movies at the North American box office accounted for close to 35% of overall ticket sales, against a corresponding figure of 25% in 2014.

The record $38bn figure is based on estimates from box-office analyst Rentrak. “The importance of the [non-North American] marketplace to the overall success of the motion picture studios, the exhibition business and the movies themselves cannot be overstated, with key territories across the globe plus North America providing the collective horsepower to push us near the $40bn mark for the first time ever,” said the firm’s senior media analyst, Paul Dergarabedian.

Universal led the way among the major studios in 2015, with the company’s films taking $6.88bn worldwide, thanks to the success of Jurassic World, Minions and Fast & Furious 7. Disney, which boasts The Force Awakens and Avengers: Age of Ultron among its roster, crossed $5bn just before Christmas.