Fifty Shades of Grey actor queries why there are no longer roles in film for her mother Melanie Griffith, 58, and grandmother Tippi Hedren, 85

Fifty Shades of Grey actor Dakota Johnson has condemned as “brutal” a film industry that can find no room for her mother, Melanie Griffith, and grandmother Tippi Hedren.

Johnson, who is promoting her new film, Black Mass, told Vogue UK that she worried about her future in Hollywood at the age of 26. But she suggested matters were much worse for Working Girl star Griffith, 58, and Hitchcock muse Hedren, 85.

“Why isn’t my mother in the movies? She’s an extraordinary actress,” asked Johnson. “Why isn’t my grandmother in the movies? This industry is fucking brutal,” she added.

“No matter how tough you are, sometimes there’s the feeling of not being wanted. It’s absurd and cut-throat. Whenever I have downtime, I’m unsure that I will ever work again. I don’t know what it is, but it’s a definite thing that happens to me.”

Nevertheless, Johnson said she remained proud of her work in Fifty Shades of Grey, the erotic romance that was panned by critics despite taking more than $500m worldwide in 2015.

“I’m proud of Fifty Shades of Grey. I don’t need to distance myself from that,” she said. “The more work I do, the more the general public sees the different things I can do. Do I think it opened doors? Yeah. More people know my name.”

Griffith was once one of the best-known female actors in Hollywood, picking up an Oscar-nomination for her turn as an ambitious young working-class woman in 1988’s Working Girl. She starred in Bonfire of the Vanities, Lolita and Woody Allen’s Celebrity in the 1990s, but her film career cooled after the turn of the century and she is currently starring in the TV show Hawaii Five-O.

Hedren made her film debut in 1963 in Alfred Hitchcock’s The Birds. She went on to star in the British director’s follow-up, Marnie, about an emotionally troubled young woman, in 1964, but later fell out with the film-maker and subsequently accused him of being a sexual predator. In 1981, Hedren starred in the cult lion thriller Roar, but lead roles were otherwise few and far between and she largely moved into supporting parts and TV.

Johnson’s comments come after a series of famous actors revealed their struggles with Hollywood ageism. Oscar-nominee Maggie Gyllenhaal revealed in May that she was branded too old, at 37, to play the love interest of a 55-year-old man, while Liv Tyler said in September that she felt like a “second-class citizen” in Hollywood, at the age of just 38, due to film-industry sexism.