After the artist performed a Times Square concert for man’s best friend, Adam Gabbatt presents low-frequency songs for further canine listening

Laurie Anderson played a concert for more than 50 dogs in New York City on Monday night. 

As much as dogs can appear to enjoy music specifically written for them, the dogs appeared to enjoy the music that had been specifically written for them.

According to Anderson, the key to writing and performing music that dogs can fully appreciate is all in the frequency – the low frequency. 

For those dogs reading this, you will be pleased to learn that there is lots of low-frequency music you can enjoy, spanning a range of genres. Here is some recommended listening for you. You dogs.

Sunn O)))Formed in 1998, Sunn O))) are among the pioneers of drone metal. Drone metal is characterised by slow tempo and lots of sub-bass – a sound that extends down to the lowest frequency humans can hear. Perfect for lolling around with your favourite bone.

Recommended track: It Took The Night To Believe

The BugKevin Martin has produced music under lots of different names and with lots of different people. Performed under his alias the Bug, his music features all sorts of different influences, including dubstep. Again, there is lots of sub-bass, which we are almost certain dogs love.

Recommended track: Poison Dart (feat Warrior Queen)

Lou ReedMetal Machine Music, Reed’s fifth album, was much maligned at the time of its release, but has gained a cult following in recent years. Drone music was considered a major influence on the record, and there are lots of different frequency levels. Some of those might be suitable for dogs. Reed was married to Anderson, so there is a topical connection.

Recommended track: Metal Machine Music, Pt 2

La Monte YoungYoung’s work tends to feature a range of frequencies, including ones low enough to be appreciated by dogs. Reed cited Young as an influence on Metal Machine Music, so there’s a nice link. Drone rocker Dylan Carson also likes Young. Check out him maybe.Recommended track: Dream House

Here are some songs with the word “dog” in them. There are more than three; this is just a selection.