Fundraising appeal will send out Moose Kid anthologies to 50 children’s wards across the UK

A crowdfunding campaign to put comics into the hands of children in hospital has more than doubled its target, raising funds to distribute printed issues of the Moose Kid anthology to 50 hospitals across the UK.

The appeal was organised by the comic artist Jamie Smart, who has worked on Desperate Dan for the Dandy and Roger the Dodger for the Beano, and aimed to raise £2,000 to finance the project. When this week’s deadline passed, supporters had contributed more than £5,350, which will allow multiple issues to be produced throughout 2016.

Moose Kid Comics launched online in June 2014, but now Smart has teamed up with the charity Readathon, which provides books for children’s wards, to produce and distribute a printed edition.

Speaking to the Guardian, Smart said he was amazed by the response.

“The original £2,000 target we set was to fund the printing of Moose Kid Comics issue one and two,” Smart said, “which would then be sent to approximately 50 children’s hospitals and wards across the UK.”

With more than £5,000 raised, Smart continued, “we can get more comics printed, and we can send them out regularly throughout the year, not just as a one-off. So possibly three deliveries, throughout 2016. Now thanks to our generous funders we can reach even more children with comics, and keep them amused while they’re going through a rough time.”

Smart put together an online Christmas special to promote the fundraiser, which is now due to be printed up and distributed to hospitals in time for Christmas 2016.

According to Readathon, books are “incredibly important” to children in hospital, where “they comfort, distract, reassure and entertain”.

“Throughout the year, Readathon provides brand new books and storyteller visits to brighten up the days of children in hospitals across the UK,” the charity said. “Even children unable to leave their beds can choose books from Readathon’s specially designed mobile bookcase, and because they are brand new, the books are safe for those at high risk of infection.”