With Tolstoy’s War and Peace returning for a new screen adaptation, we look back at the esteemed author’s life and work through the Guardian and Observer archives

The first mention in the Manchester Guardian of War and Peace by Count Leo Tolstoy appeared two years after its publication, on 7 February 1871. The paper’s St Petersburg correspondent cited Tolstoy and his work as an example of steps being made in Russia to establish a ‘national culture’, and noted that the novel had created ‘something amounting to a sensation’. 

Though best known for War and Peace and his other epic novel, Anna Karenina, Tolstoy’s short stories were also well received. An Observer review dated 1878 praises the novella The Cossacks for shedding light on Russian society, which was poorly understood at the time, claiming the work was ‘more likely to awaken in Englishmen a friendly feeling towards their great rival than anything else we know of.’ 

By the turn of the century, with Russian society in increasing disarray, Tolstoy’s pre-eminence was such that an editorial in the Manchester Guardian called him the ‘greatest living thinker in Europe’.

 However not all of the paper’s readership agreed, with one letter writer, ‘Vigilant of Manchester’, declaring Tolstoy a dangerous anarchist whose political philosophy was ‘superficial’ and possessed ‘Utopian hollowness’.

Tolstoy himself appeared a great many times on the paper’s correspondence page, writing across a range of issues. Unsurprisingly a recurring point was the political repression evident in Russia as the reign of Tsar Nicholas II grew increasingly unstable. 

Tolstoy also frequently wrote letters on both contemporary and historic literature. One of his letters to George Bernard Shaw, which appeared posthumously, critiqued the playwright’s Man and Superman, stating disappointment that the use of comedy undermined the seriousness of the work. Another letter to an academic condemns Shakespeare as ‘beneath criticism’ and a writer of ‘pseudo-beauties’.

In November 1910 the Manchester Guardian reported that Tolstoy had fled his family estate accompanied by his doctor. As Tolstoy’s health declined and he became further removed from society, his family relations grew increasingly strained. The report speculated that tensions were fuelled by Tolstoy’s refusal of royalties and the Nobel prize. 

After a few days travelling third class by train and visiting monasteries, Tolstoy died on 20 November 1910. His family had caught up with him to be present at his deathbed.

The confusion surrounding Tolstoy’s last days caused his death to be prematurely announced in the Manchester Guardian on 17 November 1910, with a full page illustrated obituary. It was corrected the next day. 

A letter followed a day later from Aylmer Maude, English translator of Tolstoy’s works, stating that the photograph of the bearded man used in the obituary was not the author of War and Peace but was in fact a ‘Russian beggar’.