In 1938, Cyril Connolly’s Enemies of Promise identified domesticity, drink, journalism and politics as snares for the apprentice writer. In an age of Amazon and the creative writing course, DJ Taylor asks what those enemies are now

There never was a British literary world that didn’t believe itself to exist in a permanent state of flux. The “serious writers” of the 1890s, grimly regarding developments in popular journalism, thought they were being deluged in trash. The columnists of the 1930s lamented the decline of the “mid-list” (meritorious works with average sales) quite as feelingly as their modern day successors. An early issue of Granta, published in 1981 and titled “Beyond the Publishing Crisis” dwelt on what seemed to be the near insuperable difficulties facing anyone keen to make a living out of printing, selling, writing or criticising books. Times have always been hard, and from the travails of the impoverished hacks in George Gissing’s New Grub Street (1891) onward, conspectuses of literary life nearly always turn out to be jeremiads.

If, as is very often suggested in book-trade journals, our own literary world is in the middle of a revolution – the revolution of the online bargain bin and the Amazon reviewer, the falling income and the squeeze on arts journalism – then it is worth asking exactly on whose behalf this insurrection is being carried out. We all know that the gates of that old citadel of hardback novels in tiny print-runs, literary journalism and Leavisite sneering at expressions of popular taste – all the classic manifestations of “literary life” covered in John Gross’s pioneering study The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters (1969) – are being stormed, but who stands to benefit from their overthrow?

A certain kind of reader does very well in a landscape of cheap books of whose merits no serious questions are asked. So do the self-published and the self-publicising. And so, above all, does the online monopoly for whose ultimate benefit the racket is conducted. But what about the writers? How do they get on? Where do they find the leisure and the funding to produce the books on which any literary culture, whether staffed by Dickens, Thackeray and Charlotte Brontë, or by a gang of crowdfunders and cyber-collaborators, will eventually be judged? This may be a good age in which to be reading books, or selling books, or preventing other people from selling them, but is it a good age to be writing them?

All of which takes us back to the great mid-century literary critic Cyril Connolly’s Enemies of Promise, an attempt to identify, albeit from the vantage point of 1938, some of the snares that lie in wait for apprentice writers, and the many impediments strewn across their path. Like much of the raw material that went to make up the Connolly myth, Enemies is several things: it is a rueful evocation of his Etonian and Oxonian adolescence, a pitiless exploration of his own neuroses and an open hold for a bumper cargo of lapidary epigrams. It is simultaneously an apparently objective analysis of the conditions in which literature gets written, in which Connolly sets out with the aim of establishing what qualities, or strokes of fortune, are required to enable a book to last 10 years, and a study of one particular author and his attempts to fulfil this task. If there are victims then one of them, or so we infer from the demoralising downward march that turns his exemplar “Walter Savage Shelleyblake” from a young man of promise into a magazine hack, is Connolly himself.

Enemies of Promise is divided into three parts: a scorching 100 or so pages of literary criticism in which Connolly anatomises the contending styles of the 1930s (“The New Mandarins”, “The New Vernacular” and so on); a final third sorrowing over his Georgian boyhood; and, sandwiched between them, a section entitled “The Charlock’s Shade”. In this second part, George Crabbe’s poem “The Heath” is pressed into service as a metaphorical lexicon: here, he writes, where “the thin harvest waves its withered ears”, is the literary world of the 1930s in miniature. Crabbe’s “thin harvest” may be taken as the achievement of young authors, the “withered ears” their books and the “thistles” politics. The “Poppies, nodding” are drink, daydreams and diversion, the “blue Bugloss” the clarion call of journalism and the “slimy Mallow” that of worldly success. The “Charlock” doubles up as sex, and the “clasping Tares” are the obligations of duty and domesticity. The “mingled tints” are the varieties of talent and accomplishment which duly appear, and the “sad splendour” is that of their evanescent promise. “These enemies of literature, these parasites on genius” require detailed examination, Connolly informs us, for they are “blights from which no writer is immune”.

Naturally, there are distinctions to be made. Connolly, we ought to remember, was writing in the year of the Munich agreement. When he suggests that “a writer must grow used to the idea that culture as we know it may disappear and remain lost for ever or till it is excavated, a thousand years hence, from a new Herculaneum”, and that at any moment the schools of Athens may be closed and the libraries burned, he is not talking about the retreat of newspaper arts pages and the squeeze on publishers’ lists, but the prospect of Armageddon. And when he insists that the writer must be “a lie‑detector who exposes the fallacies in words and ideals before half the world is killed for them” he is reacting to some highly specific threats to civilised life that no serious person could ignore.

At the same time he is always worth reading on the more mundane pressures experienced by the man or woman in search of, as he rather grandiosely puts it, “the truth that is always being clouded over by romantic words and ideas or obscured by actions and motives dictated by interest and fear”. The reader senses that he has felt them himself, that the apathy he diagnoses as one of the great stumbling blocks placed in the writer’s path can be traced back to the New Statesman critic in the Chelsea flat squandering his talent on this week’s fiction roundup when he should be writing his great masterpiece. Or rather not squandering it, because there is a counter-argument lurking behind the satire of Shelleyblake which urges us not to forget the importance of the New Statesman critic tapping out his thousand words and the forces he represents.

And so, to revert to the Connolly model, what snares lie in wait for the young writer of today? Creeping domesticity, marital obligation, interest-free mortgages, all the urgent summonses of hearth and home encapsulated by his immortal phrase “the pram in the hall” are more easily avoided now than they were 80 years ago. As for the “thistles”, politics, too, is not the drain on a writer’s energies that it was in the era of Jarrow and Spain. The last decade in which there was any sustained and dramatic sense of a political divide that extended into literature was the 80s, an age in which Mrs Thatcher dined with rightwing acolytes such as Kingsley Amis and VS Naipaul, while her opponents wrote multi-signature letters to this newspaper about spending cuts and the miners’ strike. Naturally, there are still heartfelt assemblages of literary opinion on the great political issues of the day – see Authors Take Sides: Iraq and the Gulf War from 2004 and the excellent work done by PEN – but they tend to be undercut by a suspicion that the days when writers could be expected to contribute usefully to debates of this kind are over. There are no more HG Wellses flying out to Moscow to interview Stalin; the modern equivalent is Elton John.

What about the review columns and the blue Bugloss? The snares of literary journalism are more easily avoided for the simple reason that in an era of declining print circulations and negligible fees there is a lot less of it to be had – so little, in fact, that the young novelist would quite like to know where this particular enemy of promise can be found.

What has really changed, perhaps, in the years since Connolly set to work are some of the fundamental structures through whose agency literature is produced. Broadly speaking, the two most significant developments with the capacity to alter the outward face that “literature” presents to the world are the rise of creative writing MAs and the employment of novelists and poets to teach them. The aspiring writer of the Connolly generation was effectively an amateur, or at any rate self-taught, whose knowledge of the world he – occasionally she – was attempting to infiltrate was picked up as he went along. His tutors, such as they were, tended to be literary editors, publishers’ readers or older writers met socially, and the advice they gave was strictly informal. The avant garde novelist Henry Green, for example, when asked where he had honed his skills, used to pay tribute to “Old Garnett”, the literary adviser Richard Garnett, who played the same formative and unobtrusive role in the development of many young writers in the 1920s as, say, Malcolm Bradbury did in the 1970s – the difference being that Garnett was relatively obscure and Bradbury a justly celebrated literature professor at the University of East Anglia.

There are no HG Wellses flying to Moscow to interview Stalin; the modern equivalent is Elton John

Consider, for example, the early career of Connolly’s little known but by no means unsuccessful friend, Esme Beresford de Courcy Littlejohn (1905‑1982). Like Connolly, Littlejohn was educated at Eton. Upon leaving Balliol College, Oxford, where he secured a third-class degree in modern history, he secured temporary employment in the office of a London publicity firm. Introduced by an old school friend to the literary editor of the Spectator, he made his debut in 1929 with a review of another old school friend’s first novel.

More work of this kind soon followed, and with the encouragement of a wealthy uncle, who allowed him a small private income until he was able to establish himself, he set up as a writer of light historical biographies. His contribution to Spain: Authors Take Sides, although ambiguous, was generally thought to express qualified support for Franco. By the late 1930s, by now married to a baronet’s daughter and living comfortably in South Kensington, he was making a steady £1,500 a year.

Contrast this with the progress of Esme’s great grandson Hugo (born 1985). From an early stage, Hugo was determined to “be a writer”. In his late teens he began to post small fragments of poetry and prose on a website of his own devising. At the University of Loamshire he wrote a much-admired final year dissertation on textual hermeneutics, before moving on, at the age of 22, to a creative writing MA at the same establishment. Here he had the good luck to be taught by the Man Booker-shortlisted author Terence Frisk and the award-winning poet Sally Marjoribanks, and also to have one of his short stories printed in the department’s annual anthology, Spring Buds. Happily, this was noticed by an agent who attended the launch party and within a year of leaving university – he was at this point working part-time in the local branch of Waterstones – Hugo had his first novel, Come and Lie With Me accepted for publication. The advance was a mere £5,000, with the result that Hugo, now aged 27, shortly afterwards accepted an offer from his alma mater to return to its creative department as an assistant lecturer. His second novel, the provisionally titled Sighs and Whispers, is still incomplete.

What is the essential difference between Esme and his great grandson? The one, it might be said, treated the business of writing as an amusing and profitable way to make a living; the other is thoroughly professionalised, as accomplished a technician in his way as an engineer. At the same time, there are other discrepancies. Esme, for example, spent much of the early 30s travelling in parts of the world that were, at this time, more or less off the map. He also fought in the second world war, latterly in military intelligence where he was supposed to have had dealings with the secret services. Someone with a feel for the period, and a knowledge of upperclass life in the interwar era, could write an entertaining biography of Esme. But it is very unlikely that, 60 years hence, one will be written about Hugo, who seems set to see out his days in further education, writing occasional novels that will inevitably reflect the protocols of the organisations he serves. Hugo, in other words, has been institutionalised, turned into one of literature’s civil servants, a process which, it might be argued, is far more of a threat to the survival of any kind of literary culture than cyberspace or online collaboration.

None of this is Hugo’s fault. He wants to be a writer, and these, generally speaking, are the hoops through which the apprentice has to jump in order to succeed in an ever more crowded professional marketplace. Neither is it the fault of university English departments, which are full of distinguished writers producing excellent novels. In a world where most writers can never hope to make a living out of their work they are a necessary evil – a sort of glorified employment bureau which, at any rate, prevents Novelist X, or indeed Hugo Littlejohn, from having to work in a bank.

But whether he, or she, teaches at a university, works for an advertising agency, or juggles various kinds of increasingly badly paid journalism, the contemporary writer is fated to discover that most of the conditions that attend his or her professional life – from the modes of modern publishing to the vengeful ghosts of the technological machine – are enemies of promise. As for their cumulative effect, this can only be to inhibit the writer’s ability to say the things that people do not wish to hear – which might be defined as one of the main functions of literature, in this or any other age.

• DJ Taylor’s The Prose Factory: Literary Life in England Since 1918 is published by Chatto on 7 January.