A new edition of a 1949 crime novel has won critical praise, but its publisher knew almost nothing about the author – until now

There is nothing more festive than an unexplained death, it seems, at least if it occurs in the pages of a seasonal whodunnit. Among a number of crime novels that did surprisingly good trade this Christmas was a title with an extra element of mystery. Murder for Christmas, a new edition of a book that first appeared in 1949, became an unexpected hit with readers and critics.

Reviewers rounding up the best titles this holiday season noted the sure narrative style and suspenseful handling of the plot. But who was the author, Francis Duncan?

“Kept guessing to the end, I am left wondering why it has taken so long to discover Francis Duncan, an author who made his mark in the 40s,” wrote the Daily Mail’s critic, Barry Turner. “With some 20 crime novels to his credit, a relaunch seems long overdue.”

Unfortunately the editors at Vintage Books, part of the Random House group, were also in the dark. They could find no biographical details for Duncan, who wrote a succession of murder mysteries in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s. So an appeal went out for anyone with information about him.

“It’s become apparent that the real puzzle is the inexplicable absence of any biographical information available about Francis Duncan himself,” said Vintage. “Despite extensive research, all that has been uncovered is the fact that the author wrote and published a number of crime novels across 20 years from 1937. A true man of mystery if ever there was one!”

But the Observer can reveal the riddle was solved last week when the author’s daughter stepped forward to let Vintage staff know more about her late father, who had been a lecturer in economics and history, and about his neglected back catalogue of books.

“We didn’t know the book was being republished until my brother, Derek, spotted a copy in his local Waterstones,” said Dr Katy Brown, an art historian, who lives in Reigate, Surrey. “When I saw the appeal I got in touch with the publishers.”

Her father, whose real name was William Underhill, wrote about 30 books, 22 of which were murder mysteries.

“He stopped writing in 1953 when I was about 10, but I was well aware of it all because they used to arrive in boxes and then be displayed on the family piano. I am sorry to say I never got around to reading them, so the reaction to Murder for Christmas has stirred up some strong emotions.”

The plot revolves around the discovery of a body under a Christmas tree. Duncan’s sleuth, Mordecai Tremaine, who appears in several of his stories, is soon unravelling the threads of the case. A former tobacconist, he arrives on Christmas Eve in the snowy village of Sherbroome to stay at the country retreat of a wealthy friend.

When midnight strikes, the gathered partygoers discover the corpse of a man who bears a striking resemblance to Father Christmas among the gifts.

Lines from the first page give a clue to the eerie tone of the book: “From the village came the sound of a bell. When the darkness was triumphant it was a strange and mournful echo that could not be located and that held a note of menace. Imagination needed little encouragement to liken it to the tolling of doom.”

Other Christmas crime titles to do well in the bestseller charts include Murder at the Old Vicarage by Jill McGown and a new series of stories brought out by the British Library including Mystery in White, by J Jefferson Farjeon, Silent Nights by Martin Edwards, and The Santa Klaus Murder by Mavis Doriel Hay. But only Francis Duncan’s novel had a real-life conundrum attached. Underhill also wrote about arithmetics, which he used to teach, under his own name, but used pseudonyms for his five historical romances (written as Hilary West) and his string of murder mysteries.

“I’m reading his books for the first time and finding much of my father in them,” said Katy Brown. “There is quite a lot of psychology in the detecting, as this was an age before today’s detailed scientific approach to crime. They are also fairly free of violence, though someone might get bonked on the head now and then, but nothing to what a writer like Jo Nesbø would do nowadays!”

In his youth Underhill worked for his local authority as a debt collector, as he was not able to afford to go on to university. During the second world war he received “emergency training” as a teacher in Bristol, and after taking a degree in later life he lectured on economics and history.

“My mother, Sylvia, typed up his books. I remember one he told from the point of view of the murderer, called They’ll Never Find Out, which earned him £600, a fair amount in the late 40s and early 50s. As I read them now it seems they get better as he goes on.

“His plotting is good and he is not bad at thumbnail character sketches. But my mother thought they were just a distraction, I think, as she was bringing me and my younger brother up.”

Underhill was a conscientious objector and a stretcher-bearer for the Royal Army Medical Corps during the war and Brown can now see her father in Tremaine, his gentle hero. “There is a chivalrous, old-fashioned attitude to women that I recognise. Quite a lot of the books also have something in them about how appalling murder is and a discussion about how we all still find it such a fascinating subject,” said Brown.

“I do feel guilty I was not more interested at the time. Particularly as before my father died he gave me a complete set of his books, some of them signed. I picked one up soon afterwards and thought this is not for me. I didn’t want to read on, because I didn’t want to feel negative. They were just gathering dust upstairs. Now I am waiting to hear this week if there are any plans to republish his other murder titles.”