It’s off to post-war Iraq for ex-CIA officer Tom King’s new one, ass-kicking superhero Patsy Walker returns, and supernatural black ops are on the menu in Cry Havoc

Comics used to be printed with just four colours, which suited their bright, simple morality. Now they increasingly deal in shades of grey. Tom King joined the CIA after 9/11 and worked for seven years as a counter-terrorism officer, including a stint operating out of Baghdad’s Green Zone after the invasion of Iraq in 2003. More than a decade later, he has retired from espionage but is revisiting his Iraq experience in The Sheriff Of Babylon, a new series from Vertigo with gritty art by Mitch Gerads. The discovery of a body under Baghdad’s iconic Victory Arch entangles three very different characters: a distracted US contractor training Iraq’s new police force, a burnt-out Shia detective who previously worked under Saddam, and a driven Sunni tribal chief tightening her grip on the city’s criminal underworld. King’s terse writing captures the volatility and cynical realpolitik of post-invasion Baghdad, and the fact that his script required CIA vetting to ensure it wasn’t revealing any sensitive operational detail gives The Sheriff Of Babylon an added real-world frisson. Issue two of the eight-part series is published next week, and will appeal to fans of Homeland and The Honourable Woman.

King has already proved he’s not just a spy guy; he’s staged his own mini-invasion of the Marvel universe with his ongoing series The Vision. Featuring the dashing red synthezoid played by Paul Bettany in Avengers: Age Of Ultron, it follows the artificially created superhero attempting to live an ordinary suburban life and was one of the best-reviewed debuts of 2015.

The recent adaptation of Jessica Jones proved that Netflix’s street-level approach to bringing Marvel characters to TV had some mileage beyond Daredevil; turns out everyone loves a private eye with a predilection for hard liquor, sardonic backchat and superpowered sex. But Jessica’s foster sister Patsy Walker, played by Rachael Taylor, seemed to even trump the headline star when it came to baggage and backstory. A former TV child sensation in the Hannah Montana mould, Patsy had avoided the usual post-fame meltdown, reinventing herself as crusading local radio talkshow host “Trish”. She also appeared to be going down the Bruce Wayne route of DIY vigilantism by putting some serious time in at her home dojo. Almost all these beats are taken from Patsy’s storied comics history, which stretches back to 1944. For years, she was kicking ass as the Avenger Hellcat and at one point married the actual son of Satan. To capitalise on her recent Netflix bump, Marvel has just launched Patsy Walker AKA Hellcat!, a new ongoing series that takes some cues from Broad City and Trainwreck, screen comedies featuring smart, funny women juggling chaotic personal and professional lives. Written by rising star Kate Leth and featuring appealingly cartoonish art from Brittney Williams, the book looks a lot breezier than the rainy, depressing Hell’s Kitchen of Netflix’s TV universe but a bit of lightness is probably no bad thing for anyone bummed out after bingeing Jessica Jones.

From hellcats to hellhounds: Cry Havoc is a new creator-owned series from UK writer Simon Spurrier and US artist Ryan Kelly that launches in late January from Image Comics. As that title subtly lets slip, it’s a story about dogs of war. Weaving together three different timelines, it’s a knotty tale to gnaw on, jumping from contemporary London to war-torn Afghanistan, where vengeful supernatural manifestations are coerced into military black ops. A busker also gets torn to ribbons by a psychic werewolf, something that most of us, in our less wholesome moments, have surely fantasised about. Comics elder/god Alan Moore – who recently hand-picked Spurrier to continue his Crossed +100 series about a future pandemic of sex-crazed zombies – calls Cry Havoc “best in show”. To make each of the story’s timelines distinct, Spurrier and Kelly collaborated with three different colourists, spotlighting an often underappreciated comics art. Like Steven Soderbergh’s Traffic, the colour-coding helps the reader keep their bearings as they parse Spurrier’s inventive dialogue, which mixes pungent street neologisms, highfalutin science talk and heroically pernickety wordplay to create a distinctive Nadsat. It’s a joy to read.