Political historian who focused on the roots of south-east Asian nationalism

Benedict Anderson’s Imagined Communities (1983) was the most influential book in the wave of writing in the early 1980s that made nationalism an important subject for analysis and teaching. It was provoked by the wars of 1978-79 between communist “brothers”, Vietnam, Cambodia and China, and highlighted the failure of Marxist analyses to explain the nationalism that repeatedly defeated socialist internationalist ideals.

The book challenged earlier European narratives by locating the pioneers of nationalism in 18th-century Latin America. It gave currency to such concepts as “print capitalism” (communities forming around newspapers and journals with a common language) and the official nationalism of states, which Anderson, who has died aged 79, saw as the negative kind.

Son of Veronica (nee Bigham) and Shaemas Anderson, he was born in Kunming, China. His father served in the Chinese Maritime Customs service, and was descended from Scottish Andersons and Irish O’Gormans, one of whom, Richard O’Gorman, who had taken part in the “Young Irelander” rebellion of 1848, provided Benedict’s middle names. He wrote: “Though I was educated in England [at Eton] from the age of 11, it was difficult to imagine myself English.” He gained a first in classics at King’s College, Cambridge, but found himself politicised on the side of the underdog in a demonstration by chiefly south Asian students against Britain’s 1956 invasion of Suez.

The following year, he escaped this background, through an invitation to become a teaching assistant in the department of government at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York. This came during the department’s heyday as the centre for George Kahin’s model of exploring new south-east Asian nationalisms. Abandoning earlier thoughts of India, Anderson became the most brilliant of Kahin’s graduate students on Indonesian politics, and his eventual successor at Cornell. The “government” label of the Cornell department proved congenial to Anderson’s historical-cultural approach, and he did not disguise his contempt for what he saw as the scientific delusions of American political science.

After seemingly effortlessly acquiring Indonesian, Dutch and some Japanese, Anderson plunged into what he later labelled “a sort of love affair with ‘traditional Javanese culture’”, during two and a half years of fieldwork (1961-64) into the revolutionary struggle against Dutch colonialism. The thesis that eventually became Java in a Time of Revolution: Occupation and Resistance, 1944-1946 (1972) sensitively explored the youth movement, radicalism, and the cultural styles of Dutch, Japanese and Javanese rulers.

Anderson had by the time of its publication become a dominant figure in the understanding of Indonesia, through his cultural analyses, his powerful response to the 1965 trauma, and his founding of the Cornell journal Indonesia (1966). His pamphlet Mythology and the Tolerance of the Javanese (1965) explored Java’s shadow theatre (wayang) as a fundamental means of understanding and normalising difference.

In The Idea of Power in Javanese Culture (1972), he sought to show “that traditional Javanese culture did have a political theory that offered a systematic and logical explanation of political behaviour” in complete contrast to that of modern political science. Brilliant demonstrations of how culture matters in politics, these immediately entered the debates in social theory.

Later much disillusioned, he would concede that his brother Perry, for many years editor of the New Left Review, had convinced him that “Indonesians were, after all, part of the human species, and could not possibly be incomparable and unique as I had nationalistically insisted.”

Disillusion had come with the Jakarta coup of 30 September 1965, overtly led by Lt Col Untung, one of President Sukarno’s palace guards, against a rightist Council of Generals. Suharto, the most strategically placed general to escape murder in the coup, insisted that it was a communist-inspired betrayal, and used it relentlessly to justify the elimination of the Indonesian left through incalculable massacres and arrests. Anderson later explained his response: “It felt like discovering that a loved one is a murderer.”

Anderson, with his Cornell colleague Ruth McVey, sought to make sense of these events through a provisional report on the coup that became known as the “Cornell paper”, circulated to friends in January 1966. It was inevitably leaked to wider circles, became a source of controversy and caricature, and was published unchanged to put the record straight in 1971. Its detailed analysis was valuable to all, but its premature release trapped its authors into standing by one of several possible explanations – that the coup was what it claimed to be, an internal army affair. Anderson was banned from his beloved Indonesia from 1972 until after the fall of Suharto in 1998.

Once the Suharto regime’s permanence became clear, Anderson added Thai, Spanish and Tagalog to his languages and produced a range of revisionist essays on Thai and Philippine history. He continued to teach at Cornell until 2002 (when he was appointed professor emeritus of international studies), and in retirement he established an alternative home in Bangkok. His approach required the hard route of acquiring the language before he presumed to have anything important to say about the political culture.

Everything Anderson wrote was boldly original, challenging assumptions by uncovering a neglected or suppressed voice. He was never content to tell an audience what they wanted to hear.

He is survived by his brother and by a sister, Melanie.

• Benedict Richard O’Gorman Anderson, historian and political scholar, born 26 August 1936; died 13 December 2015