Feathers, threats and shifting allegiances in an absorbing story about school bullying.

Childhood can be extremely difficult. This is something that many of us seem to forget when we grow up, precisely because it can be such a troublesome journey. Those who write books for adolescents have not forgotten this fact, and recognise that while childhood can offer freedom, adventure and fun, it is possible for even children in loving families to find themselves alone, isolated by problems that seem insurmountable.

The Icarus Show is a book that ably dramatises this conundrum, and does so with lightness and grace. Alex Meadows has not found the move to secondary school an easy one, and has developed a maxim for staying out of trouble: don’t react. He has seen what happened to David, the boy next door, who answered back when teased by Alan and now suffers daily abuse. Alex’s strategy seems to be serving him well, until he discovers a feather in his school bag, along with a note: “Coming Soon. A boy is going to fly.”

What follows is the unravelling of a mystery as Alex discovers that he is not the only one to have received a feather; in fact, everyone in the year has had one. As more notes follow, Alex becomes absorbed by the question of who is sending them: why, and how is a boy going to fly?

Bullying is frequently not a clear-cut issue. Christie’s book reminds us of the complexity of negotiating the schoolyard and the classroom, how shifting allegiances and the need to survive can bring out the worst, and the best, in people. It’s in such an atmosphere that Alex and David strike up an uneasy friendship, both drawn in by “the Icarus Show” in their own ways, and this is the most successful part of the novel.

The current craze for first-person narrators has a potential pitfall: if your protagonist is an 11- or 12-year-old boy, then they really ought to sound like one. Many novels let themselves down when the young narrator talks as if they’ve just completed a degree in psychology.

The Icarus Show manages this balance well. Not only are we convincingly presented with Alex’s story in his own words, Christie also achieves something else that is a challenge to any writer: she gets us to like an unlikable character. David is gruff, monosyllabic and seemingly not best-friend material, but we are made to perceive the troubles that lie behind his off-putting behaviour. Crucially, we do so through the eyes of our young narrator, Alex. In fact, there are some small sections towards the end of the book that switch to the third person, and which possibly could have been avoided, since it’s a shame to leave Alex’s view of the world, even for a few lines. For Alex is a boy who, like most of us, struggles to do the right thing at times, but ultimately knows that kindness can make a difference.

• Marcus Sedgwick is the author of The Ghosts of Heaven (Orion). To order The Icarus Show for £8.79 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.