Prepare yourself for the great outdoors – plus a rich variety of inner lives

Glance at the avalanche of nonfiction titles now heading our way and the trends are quickly apparent. The search for the new H Is for Hawk is, for instance, clearly not over yet, for which reason publishers are sticking very firmly with nature writing. They’re also on the hunt for the next Atul Gawande (Being Mortal), continuing to back a certain kind of popular science.

Books about cities may or may not be the next big thing in reading, but editors are certainly taking a punt on them in 2016, with only the occasional nod in the direction of the hills (on top of which James Rebanks and his sheep still perch, mightily). Most striking of all, the spring lists include several books that connect, in a variety of ways, to Islam. Those wanting better to understand what is happening in the world right now are going to be well served by fat hardbacks in the coming months.

One “remarkable new voice in nature writing” is Amy Liptrot, whose memoir, The Outrun (Canongate), recounts her recovery from alcoholism on Orkney, where she grew up. But I also like the sound of Melissa Harrison’s Rain: Four Walks in English Weather (Faber), in which the novelist will pay close attention to the transformative power of our national obsession. In popular science, Paul Kalanithi’s When Breath Becomes Air (Bodley) is a meditation on the relationship between doctor and patient by a writer who was both (Kalanithi, a neuroscientist, died of cancer last year at the age of just 37), while in The Voices Within: The History and Science of How We Talk to Ourselves (Profile), Charles Fernyhough, a professor of psychology, “eavesdrops” on our thoughts in an effort to explore the science of introspection.

Among the books about cities are Ben Judah’s teeming narrative This Is London: Life and Death in the World City (Picador, which is making some hefty claims for it). I’m also looking forward to Barnabas Calder’s field guide to British brutalism, Raw Concrete (William Heinemann). But if these sound just too, well, urban, swap grey for green with Travis Elborough’s quirky and delightful A Walk in the Park: The Life and Times of a People’s Institution (Cape) or, moving beyond city limits, Anna Pavord’s Landskipping (Bloomsbury), which tells the story of the emergence of landscape as an artistic, cultural and tourist phenomenon.

When it comes to the current collision between current affairs and global history, I would send you first to Crusade and Jihad by Malcolm Lambert (Profile), which looks backwards to the struggle to control the holy places of Palestine and forwards to the terrorists now operating in the Middle East, Africa and Europe. But The Egyptians: A Radical Story by Jack Shenker (Allen Lane) is, I can promise, a sparky and resolutely cliche-free look at the struggle for democracy in 21st century Egypt. In The Morning They Came for Us: Dispatches From Syria (Bloomsbury), the veteran war correspondent Janine di Giovanni tells the stories of both ordinary Syrians and the elite, still holding their pool parties in Damascus hotels as the bombs begin to fall.

My choice of history books would include A Very English Scandal (Viking) John Preston’s eagerly awaited account of the Jeremy Thorpe affair. You might imagine we would be done by now with the story of Thorpe, his lover, and a great dane called Rinka. But Preston, a novelist and journalist by day, is a beautifully elegant and beady writer and this will, I bet, come with telling details missed elsewhere. See also The Wicked Boy (Bloomsbury), in which Kate Mr Whicher Summerscale dishes up yet another Victorian murder mystery; The Long Weekend by Adrian Tinniswood (Cape), an account of life in the English country house from 1918 until 1939, its years of decline; and A Passing Fury: Searching for Justice at the End of World War II by AT Williams (Cape), which aims to reveal the deeper truths of the Nuremberg tribunals. Williams won the Orwell prize for his book about the killing of Baha Mousa by British soldiers in Iraq.

Finally, to memoirs and biographies, of which very many (too many?) continue to be published. Lately, I favour biographies that determinedly fail to begin at the beginning, and end at the end, for which reason I will certainly be buying Sarah Bakewell’s left bank mash-up At the Existentialist Cafe: Freedom, Being and Apricot Cocktails (Chatto), in which – santé! – Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir have the starring roles. And I have already read, and heartily recommend, You Could Do Something Amazing With Your Life [You Are Raoul Moat] by Andrew Hankinson (Scribe), which tells the story of the last days of the Geordie bodybuilder who, after killing his ex-girlfriend’s lover and blinding a policeman, went on the run in the Northumberland countryside in 2010. What sets this book apart is the fact that Hankinson’s narrative, written in the second person, is formed entirely of Moat’s own words. The result is a desperately sad book about masculinity, deprivation and loss. In A Life Discarded (4th Estate), Alexander Masters, author of the award-winning Stuart: A Life Backwards, embarks on a biographical detective story, his starting point 148 mould-covered notebooks found in a Cambridge skip in 2001.

The memoir I’m looking forward to most is by Hisham Matar, the Libyan writer whose novel, In the Country of Men, was shortlisted for the Booker prize in 2006. In The Return: Fathers, Sons and the Land In Between (Viking) Matar, whose father was kidnapped and imprisoned in Libya when he was 19, returns to the land of his early childhood following the fall of Colonel Gaddafi. It is bound to be heart-breaking, but it will also, I am certain, be exquisitely written.

To order any of these titles for a special price go to bookshop.theguardian.com