Kate Miller’s brilliant debut is so steeped in the sea, it’s almost as if the ocean were co-author.

In The Observances, Kate Miller elevates the art of looking into something that is, if not strictly religious, devotional. This is a brilliant debut. Some of her poems resemble “found” art – her eye alights on what the less watchful would miss, she makes sense of the accidental, connects the arbitrary, creates form. In Regarding a Cloud, the first poem in the collection, she spots a “picknicker’s spoon with no handle”, which is “exposed/ by a scalping of growth/ and it’s upside down,/ mortared in mud”. The spoon becomes a mirror, the poem a reclamation. The troubling No Place, about a homeless child, is another “found” piece. And in At the Dew Pond, West Dale, she spies a “tiny snake” in the “cool puree of a pond”. More splendidly intentional is And Now You, about a baby’s arrival in the world. Whatever the subject, looking takes time. This is reflected in the calm elegance of these pieces.

Miller is painterly too (she studied art history at Cambridge before becoming an English lecturer at Goldsmiths). There is a virtuoso poem inspired by a Turner sketchbook, Colour Beginnings, in which she imagines the painter witnessing the burning of the Houses of Parliament, her words a wild impasto. In Lines to Convey Distance, she summons a less fiery palette: “Send me one hundred greys to catch the chill and whip of water.” The sea is almost her co-author, whipping at the book’s edges. But what I admire most is that the writing is sensuous without ever being slipshod. There is no luxurious surrender. Hers is an alert, defended gaze.

There is a wonderful poem called Every Book Is a Long Walk in which the “worn green hardback” she is reading up on a headland – a romance perhaps – merges with what she is seeing when she looks up from it. Again, this is merest accident – the chance collision of book and place, the meeting of two seas, actual and imaginary. But she makes something beautiful of it. She closes the book yet can still see its heroine:

One could tweak the title of this poem to remark that in this collection every poem is a long walk – or at least to say that it includes several excursions. Passage, for instance, is a marvellous journey into deepest woodland. Throughout, her gift is a gift to us. She has a way of situating us precisely in time and place so we can see what she has seen. Minding the Antiquarian Bookseller’s House begins:

“High on the scent of bindings, I open first editions,/ leaves, more leaves. The front room is a dell of books/ pushed to the ceiling, mist clinging to their spines,/ the letters cut with dust.” The house becomes a landscape and we are in it.

And always there is a sense here that poetry itself helps control the heart. In Longest Day, the title effortlessly earns its double meaning. It is an understated valediction. The landscape serves the emotion and does the talking. She describes the “settled parishes of wood and weeds I hoped would anchor us”. I love the playful “parishes” dignifying the undeserving weeds. But the poem’s invisible subject will not remain. Only the poem itself can be an anchor.

The Observances is published by Carcanet (£9.99). Click here to buy it for £7.99