A picaresque tale about ageing and adventure, moving from Mexico to the Philippines, tackles the big questions with gusto and charm.

 “Writing a novel is actually searching for victims,” John Irving told the Paris Review in 1986, when he had published six novels, including The World According to Garp; his next would come three years later, with A Prayer for Owen Meany, which remains his bestselling novel and one that can still induce a Pavlovian flood of tears in many readers. Simple as it might sound, Irving’s description is nicely ambiguous: does the searching imply identification, the finding of victimhood through the excavation of character and personal history? Or does it more strongly relate to another kind of excavation – a sorting through the post-disaster rubble in the hope of finding survivors?

In the kind of novels that Irving writes, of course, the answer is both; layering and juxtaposing multiple slices of the past, he achieves a kaleidoscopic narrative effect, in which fragments of history are repeatedly shuffled to present a perpetually changing picture. At the same time, he is much concerned with forward momentum, with propelling his protagonists through a heavily populated world of tragicomic coincidence and resonance. “I’m not a 20th-century novelist,” he also told the Paris Review. “I’m not modern, and certainly not postmodern. I follow the form of the 19th-century novel ... I’m old-fashioned, a storyteller. I’m not an analyst and I’m not an intellectual.”

That was nearly 30 years ago, and Irving would probably still shy away from the labels modern or postmodern, although one might argue that the latter tangentially manifests itself in his modest forays into magic realism. In Avenue of Mysteries, for example, we meet Lupe, a young Mexican girl whose strangulated voice can only be understood by her brother, Juan Diego, who relays her bullish views to the rest of the world, occasionally tempering them for the faint-hearted. Lupe can also read minds, and has the gift of partial clairvoyance; her grip of the future is often shaky, but robust enough to grant her a sense of destiny – especially as it relates to her brother, whom she knows will eventually leave Oaxaca, where the two grow up, first in the local rubbish dump and then in the orphanage of Lost Children. They are not, in fact, orphans: their mother, Esperanza, cleans the orphanage by day and is a prostitute by night; their paternity is obscure, a recurrent Irving theme. When Esperanza dies in a fall while dusting a giant statue of the Virgin Mary (taking Mary’s nose with her in the process), the children are further unmoored, and another strand of the novel – the power of the Catholic Church and the relationship between Mexico’s indigenous peoples and their Spanish colonisers – intensifies.

This intricate story is not presented to us directly, but as a series of dreams experienced by Juan Diego, now in his 50s and a successful writer who has lived most of his life in Iowa. “In a Juan Diego Guerrero novel,” we hear, “everyone is a kind of outsider; Juan Diego’s characters feel they are foreigners, even when they’re at home.” And during the course of Avenue of Mysteries’ present-day setting, Juan Diego puts himself further from even a notional home by travelling to the Philippines, ostensibly to fulfil a decades’-old promise to a dead hippy draft-dodger he met back in Oaxaca. On planes, in taxis and in inhospitable hotel rooms (one memorably boasting a giant aquarium policed by a terrifying moray eel), Juan Diego slips into sleep and brings to life his picaresque upbringing.

His dreams tell of a convoluted battle for identity, acceptance and escape, and not just his own. There is more than one life-changing accident: Juan Diego and Lupe’s protector, the head of the dump, unwittingly runs over the boy’s foot, leaving him with a lifelong limp; trainee priest Señor Eduardo, newly arrived in Oaxaca from Iowa, carries both literal and spiritual scars from a childhood incident involving a mah jong tile that ended with the death of his beloved dog. As one might expect, there is a circus (lions rather than Irving’s customary bears), filled with both friends and enemies. Lupe, with her otherworldly voice and her belief that future events are heavily dependent on her actions, is a clear echo of Owen Meany; Flor, the prostitute who it emerges is a man living as a woman, is a relative of Garp’s Roberta Muldoon.

Back in the present, there is more strangeness, accentuated by Juan Diego’s devil-may-care experimentation with his medication. Sex arrives in the form of mother-and-daughter team Miriam and Dorothy, who appear as if from nowhere at various intervals on the writer’s journey; tellingly, their likenesses don’t appear in photographs and they are also glimpsed at important church-based moments.

All this is good fun, if incredibly meandering; Irving has packed so much detail in, and so blurred the lines between what we need to remember and what we don’t, that he seems often not to be sure himself, repeating factual bits and bobs over and over again just in case. When all goes seriously impenetrable, he pops in a question or two (“Yet what did it mean when your angels of death departed – when your personal phantasms stopped haunting you?”). His overall purpose is not entirely clear. And yet he has not run out of what has endeared him to so many for so long: immense charm, an appetite to hurtle headlong at the biggest questions and the altogether unfashionable belief that sentimentality is not a crime against art.

• To order Avenue of Mysteries for £16 (RRP £20) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.