Bestselling author personally donates a signed set of her Fifty Shades trilogy to the Sowerby Bridge Cricket Club, which was badly damaged in the Boxing Day floods

She may be more well-known for BDSM than LBW, but Fifty Shades of Grey author EL James has lent her support to a campaign to raise money for a flood-hit cricket club by personally donating a signed set of her erotic fiction trilogy.

The appeal to help Sowerby Bridge Cricket Club in West Yorkshire comes just a week after authors and publishers pitched in to help the Book Case book club in nearby Hebden Bridge, which was also hit by the Boxing Day floods that devastated the north of England.

Yorkshire husband-and-wife author team Bob and Carol Bridgestock – former police officers who write thrillers as RC Bridgestock – were involved in starting the Book Case appeal, and are now organising a similar fundraiser for the cricket club, which was also badly flooded in 2012.

Carol Bridgestock said that, after the couple tweeted about it, EL James got in touch and said she would be “honoured to help”, particularly as her personal assistant comes from Yorkshire.

“It was absolutely amazing to hear directly from her – I was lost for words that such a big-name writer was getting in touch wanting to help,” she said. “EL James is such a massive name with a huge following – everyone knows her books. She said she would sign and dedicate the books personally to whoever wins the auction. It’s such a boost.”

“Sowerby Bridge Cricket Club has been part of our life since I was a little girl, and my brother is the chairman. This club means so much to our family, former colleagues and friends. We will not let it go,” Carol said. “This is a tragedy for a local community where the sports club is the glue bringing together young and old. We hope the sale will help the club get back on its feet.”

@eBay_UK Respectfully request to be allowed to add more books to #floodappeal #auction site @sowerbybridgecc pic.twitter.com/92pnK8d4sq

Many of the books for sale on eBay to raise money for the appeal are from sports personalities, including sports historian Gary James, who has donated his last personal copy of his book Manchester: The City Years, which within minutes of going up online attracted a £100 bid from former Manchester City footballer Franny Lee. The book will be signed and dedicated to the winner.

The auction also includes items from the limited edition collection of the London bookseller Goldsboro Books, including signed first editions of Bernard Cornwell’s Warriors of the Storm, All Involved by Ryan Gattis, Hugh Howey’s Sand series, and The Love Song of Miss Queenie Hennessy by Rachel Joyce.

“Words fail me,” said Sowerby Bridge Cricket Club chairman Stephen Jordan, in response to the auction. “We can’t thank these guys enough.”

Meanwhile, the book auction for the Book Case in Hebden Bridge has so far raised more than £3,300 on eBay, with a signed edition of Jon Ronson’s Lost at Sea fetching £520 and a signed first edition of Susan Hill’s The Woman in Black raising £270. Other listings are still ongoing, including signed books from Alexander McCall Smith, Nick Hornby, Joanne Harris and Damian Barr.

Sam Missingham of Harper Collins, who picked up the Bridgestock’s initial appeal for help for the Book Case and organised the online auctions, said: “We’ve had an amazing number of authors come forward with signed and rare books, and people have been extremely generous paying huge amounts to win these books.

“The images of the Book Case bookshop in Hebden when it was flooded over Christmas have stirred authors and publishing folk alike. I am now inundated with books to add to the auction page. The owners of the Book Case are overwhelmed by the support they’ve been shown.”