Literary agent with a fearsome reputation who was devoted to the work of her brother, Ted Hughes, and the posthumous literary life of his wife Sylvia Plath

In a photograph of Ted Hughes from his youth, the poet is cradling a large mirror. It reflects his sister, Olwyn Hughes, holding a box camera: the combination of their images symbolises how, from the age of 35 until her death at the age of 87, she devoted herself to his service and then his memory.

Her life was changed by a letter she received in Paris in February 1963: “Dear Olwyn, On Monday morning, at about 6am, Sylvia gassed herself.” Later that year, she gave up the job and the city that she loved in order to help her younger brother bring up his children, three-year-old Frieda and one-year-old Nicholas, from his marriage to the poet Sylvia Plath. In Frieda’s earliest memories, the tall woman with the high thin nose and the often scolding manner was assumed to be a mother, not an aunt. During this period Olwyn translated a French novel, The Return by Michel Droit, which was published by Andre Deutsch.

Soon after moving to Court Green, the house in North Tawton, Devon, that Ted had shared with Sylvia, Olwyn found herself looking at the contract from the publishers Faber & Faber for a poetry collection that he had edited. In Paris she had worked for the Martonplay agency, so was familiar with contractual negotiations for film and stage work. She was aghast at the poor terms being offered to her brother.

Ted in turn was surprised to learn that contracts could actually be negotiated. Hitherto, simply grateful to be published, he had just signed whatever contract he was sent. So began Olwyn’s career as his agent. The novelist Jean Rhys happened to live nearby, so Olwyn took her on, too. She soon moved to London and acquired a few more clients, but the vast bulk of her time was devoted to the work of her brother and the posthumous literary life of her late sister-in-law. She earned a reputation as a fearsome, difficult gatekeeper and a tough negotiator.

Publishing expensive leather-bound limited editions of her brother’s works on her Rainbow Press proved profitable. But she was also careless over detail and made some bad mistakes, notably over the screen rights to Plath’s novel The Bell Jar – an inadvertently deleted clause led to a multimillion-dollar lawsuit that engulfed Ted in the mid-1980s.

Born in Mytholmroyd, West Yorkshire, Olwyn was the middle child of William, a carpenter, and Edith (nee Farrar); an older brother, Gerald, emigrated to Australia after the second world war. The family’s end of terrace house was cramped, but a happy childhood included picnics at Hardcastle Crags and dips in the rocky pool on Cragg Vale. When Olwyn was 10, the family moved to the mining town of Mexborough, in South Yorkshire, where they took on a newspaper and tobacco shop. Olwyn was at first miserable, but soon began to lose herself in reading books and dabbling with horoscopes and Ouija boards.

She won a scholarship to the local grammar school, but never fulfilled her academic potential. She studied English literature at Queen Mary College, London, graduating in the summer of 1950 with a 2:2. After completing a secretarial course, she got a job at the British embassy in Paris and subsequently became a secretary-cum-translator for Martonplay, where she encountered such leading figures as the Absurdist dramatist Eugène Ionesco. She was having the time of her life, with French food and wine, freedom and boyfriends. Food remained an obsession.

On just six occasions during visits home, she met the young American woman whom Ted had married after a whirlwind romance in 1956. Their first impressions of each other were wary. Olwyn found Sylvia “poised and controlled, with a hint of reserve or constraint”. Sylvia thought Olwyn was “startlingly beautiful with amber-gold hair and eyes”, but felt that she was “quite selfish and squanders money on herself continually in extravagances of clothes and cigarettes, while she still owes Ted £50”. During their last encounter, over a Yorkshire family Christmas in 1960, Sylvia and Olwyn quarrelled fiercely. They never saw each other again.

Olwyn always regretted that their last meeting was so unpleasant and it was in no small measure as self-justification and atonement that she spent the next 50 years reading Plath, talking about her, loathing the feminists who made a martyr of her, and correcting what she perceived as biographical misreadings of her brother’s ill-starred first marriage.

She exercised such close control over the writing of Anne Stevenson’s Bitter Fame: A Life of Sylvia Plath (1989) that it was branded “almost a work of dual authorship”. The story of the creation of this book is told in Janet Malcolm’s gripping book about Plath’s legacy, The Silent Woman (1994), which contains a vivid portrayal of Olwyn.

Opinionated about everything and quick in temper, she was what the essayist William Hazlitt called “a good hater”. As far as love was concerned, no man could live up to Ted. In the late 70s, she had an on-off relationship with a handsome Irishman called Richard Thomas, who had the look of Ted. He was an alcoholic, constantly in and out of hospitals and drying-out clinics. There were times, especially when travelling abroad, when Olwyn, who loved sunny Portugal and Morocco, seemed to have found happiness. They married in June 1979, but things quickly went wrong.

Thomas was violent, unfaithful and a control freak: he tried to stop Olwyn buying a house in Wales at a bargain price, simply because he did not like the man from whom she was buying it – who happened to be an old boyfriend. By the end of the year, Ted was helping Olwyn prepare her divorce papers.

She did not remarry. Her devotion to Ted was undimmed by his death in 1998. She was heartbroken by the suicide in 2009 of her nephew, Nicholas. She and Frieda flew to Alaska, where Frieda made arrangements for his cremation: Olwyn told me of the beauty of the landscape and her pleasure in seeing a moose. Before this, she had always spoken to me of Sylvia with venom; afterwards, at least for a while, the Yorkshire “pull your socks up” attitude dissolved into compassion. It was as if the loss of Nicholas – whom she had loved from his infancy and who so resembled Ted – made her finally believe that depression is real.

Sitting on a chaise covered with an indigo kilim, holding a cigarette with a gravity-defying stub of ash, she gave me a wealth of material for my biography of her brother, but she was always volatile. One day, she would write me a long letter full of vivid memories and helpful advice. The next, she would phone me up and say: “If you’re going to write about Sylvia, Sylvia, Sylvia and not Ted, you can just fuck off.”

She is survived by Gerald and Frieda.

• Olwyn Marguerite Hughes, literary agent, born 26 August 1928; died 3 January 2016