Is he hopelessly outdated, a standard-bearer for a discredited part of British history, or a writer with a profound understanding for all humanity?

The end of December 2015 marked the 150th anniversary of Rudyard Kipling’s birth. I suppose you might say that this fact proves just how long ago a century and half can seem – at least if you take the common view of Kipling as the bard of empire and the standard-bearer for a discredited part of British history. But, given the debates that still rage about Kipling, his message and his legacy, you might just as easily say how close he still seems. He is a writer of perennial interest, not just because of his undoubted talent and way with words, but because we still don’t quite know what to make of him.

Is this Indian-born, youngest ever winner of the Nobel prize for literature a parochial English figure? Is this exquisite stylist and literary innovator a hopelessly old-fashioned stick-in-the-mud? Is he a racist, or someone with sympathy and understanding for all humanity?

Hard questions. Kipling is a difficult, contradictory, thorny writer. That makes him all the more interesting, but it also means I approach him here with a certain amount of trepidation. Not least because, in spite of his fascination, I have to admit to not really knowing all that much about Kipling.

I suspect in common with many of my generation, I have a confused jumble of ideas and prejudices about the man. I know about The Jungle Book, of course. I’ve read a few strange war poems, and some very fine short stories. I’ve read The White Man’s Burden – and wondered whether he’s joking or not. I watched the TV movie of Kim, as a child back in the 1980s, when it seemed forever on British screens. But beyond that I’ve shied away, put off by the enmity of Edward Said and George Orwell’s famous demolition of Kipling’s “good bad poetry” (and the suggestion that every enlightened person must “despise him”).

This lack of real knowledge is vaguely embarrassing. It seems absurd to pretend to know and care about the development of English literature and to have read so little, to have understood so little, about such a major figure. I hope this month to overcome my ignorance for better or worse – and that you will join me.

I suggest reading Kim, since it’s already been vigorously promoted here on the Guardian Reading group, and seems the most obvious choice. It was the Kipling novel chosen by Robert McCrum, for instance, on his rundown of the 100 greatest novels – and it’s a regular feature on similar lists. It’s also got a cracking opening:

He sat, in defiance of municipal orders, astride the gun Zam-Zammah on her brick platform opposite the old Ajaib-Ghar – the Wonder House, as the natives call the Lahore museum. Who hold Zam-Zammah, that ‘fire-breathing dragon’, hold the Punjab, for the great green-bronze piece is always first of the conqueror’s loot.

How not to read on? 

I’ll write a first piece next week, and in the meantime welcome all comments and suggestions for what we might discuss. You might also enjoy reading this excellent piece by Andrew Lycett on the importance of Kipling and the debates he causes. And, as a taster, treat yourself to 10 minutes or so reading Kipling’s astonishing short story With the Night Mail. Intelligent, surprising sci-fi on a world-spanning scale. So much for being a colonial stick-in-the-mud.

One more thing to get the ball rolling. We are giving away five copies of Kim to the first readers in the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, constructive comment, in the comments section below.

If you’re lucky enough to be one of the first to comment, email Laura Kemp with your address (laura.kemp@theguardian.com). Be nice to her, too.