Your space to discuss the books you are reading and what you think of them – plus our favourite literary links

Welcome to this week’s blog, and Happy New Year to all! Here’s a roundup of your comments and photos from our last post, where TLSers shared holiday cheer and wishes, as well as their holiday reads – from ghost stories to novels set in the USSR – and what they’re looking forward to in this new year. 

MsCarey has been reading Shirley Jackson’s The Haunting of Hill House: 

[...] Am happy to report that this classic ghost story hits the spot. I loved its many nuances and will be adding We Have Always Lived in the Castle (mentioned by someone here recently) to my list. I’m now sort of reading Terry Pratchett’s Hogfather which I had saved for Christmas but I’m halfway through and it isn’t really working for me. There are lots of good individual bits but it doesn’t hang together as a coherent whole (and by coherent whole I mean one which takes account of Pratchett’s style, which I am very well used to by now). 

PatLux shared a Christmas reading coincidence:

Imagine my delight yesterday afternoon (Christmas day) as I sat chuckling through David Nicholls’s witty light novel Starter for Ten when I turned the page and found that the hero had gone home for Christmas. His account of Christmas at his mum’s reminded me of the iffy relatives one encounters at this once a year feast. He is now off to spend New Year’s at the cottage of his girlfriend, the daughter of wealthy hipster parents. I bet they will turn out to be Guardian readers. 

Roza Vulf shared her eclectic reading pile: 

"Whatever their future, at the dawn of their lives, men seek a noble vision of man's nature and of life's potential." Ayn Rand

Sent via Guardian Witness

 By Roza Vulf 

 29 December 2015, 12:21 

paulburns finished Anatoli Rybakov’s Dust and Ashes: 

A devastating portrait of Stalin, especially during the second world war, which ultimately dismisses him with withering contempt; though Rybakov is back to painting as full a portrait of the tyrant as he did in Children of the Arbat. Otherwise the book is concerned with the lead-up to the war from the Russian perspective, and with the German invasion of the USSR and the ultimate Russian victory. [...]

The German invasion of Russia is seen through the eyes of the spineless Stalin, and Sasha Pankratov, in a Russian transport division, via some very fine war writing. To say much more would involve spoilers, but its a great love story as well as a war narrative. I heartily recommend the entire trilogy.

And we close with Swelter’s delightful New Year’s anecdote, which determined his first reading choice of 2016: 

The first thing I saw on new year’s morning, outside of the quotidian sights of bed, bath, and kitchen, was a fox walking through my back yard, trotting around the house, crossing the street in front, and running off into the woods, causing the driver of a white SUV to stop and watch its passage into the undergrowth. This pleasant and unusual sighting made me decide that the first book I read this year will be David Garnett’s Lady into Fox.

If you would like to share a photo of the book you are reading, or film your own book review, please do. Click the blue button on this page to share your video or image. I’ll include some of your posts in next week’s blog.

If you’re on Instagram and a book lover, chances are you’re already sharing beautiful pictures of books you are reading, “shelfies” or all kinds of still lifes with books as protagonists. Now, you can share your reads with us on the mobile photography platform – simply tag your pictures there with #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection here.

And, as always, if you have any suggestions for topics you’d like to see us covering beyond TLS, do let us know.