Sia | Miike Snow | Will Young | Chairlift | Zibra.

PICK OF THE WEEK

Truly a hymn for everyone waking up to the first hangover of 2016, full of shame and Lidl champagne, Sia’s Alive wails: “I had a one-way ticket to a place where all the demons go/ Where the wind don’t change/ And nothing in the ground can ever grow/ No hope”. What did you say after nine hours of drinking in a too-hot and too-expensive pub? Where is your phone? Is that … a chicken nugget in your pillowcase? None of last night matters: Sia’s here with her lovely honking goose voice to bring you back to life. “I’m alive!” she points out. “I’m still breathing!” After all, isn’t that what matters the most?

Pop loves to reference historical figures: Weezer namechecked Buddy Holly, Jay Z rapped about Picasso, er, Bananarama sang a song called Robert De Niro’s Waiting. So it’s only fair that one of the most feared men in history, Genghis Khan, gets his turn at last. Miike Snow have made the cheeriest song about a conqueror that you’ll hear this year: an upbeat pop banger with an addictive “woo-woo-woo!” bit in the chorus. See, pop stars? It’s dead easy to make a total TUNE about any terrifying person. Lament about Leatherface? Stick an epic bridge in there! Ballad to the Babadook? Children’s choir! Sexy R&B number about Donald Trump? Er, best leave that one, actually.

Look, Will Young is great. And Burt Bacharach’s What The World Needs Now is great, too. But this cover – in aid of the World Wide Fund For Nature, which is why Will is singing to sad-eyed gorillas and mournful-looking puffins in the video – never really gets going. It’s all a bit polite, joyless and hesitant. You could almost say that What The World Needs Now … is definitely not another version of this song!!!! (Sorry.)

While other bands might write songs about love or heartbreak, the lyrics to Chairlift’s Romeo are based on the Greek myth of Atalanta, a woman who would only marry a suitor if he beat her in a race. The track is, fittingly, a great song to run to – all grungy guitars, catchy choruses and a beat that’s exactly the pace you jog at when you’re passing someone you know – AKA a bit faster than normal, AKA a speed that’s definitely not sustainable for longer than three minutes. This song is 3m 11s long. Be careful out there, showoffs.

Imagine if one of the interchangeable boybands from 2016 – the Vamps, or Union J, or any of the ones your niece claims to be TOTALLY STANNING on Facebook – were sent back to the 80s, given a load of keyboards and told to write a song. That’s Wasted Days: a confusing mash-up of outdated references and repetitive chanting in place of a chorus. Never has the lyric “pop some pills and we’ll all fall down” sounded more like a cry for help.