Collate Presents Legowelt | Smile High Club | Resonate | Free Residents Party | Future

Danny Wolfers first got into producing music as a teenager, inspired by items about the Roland TB-303 he’d seen on MTV. Around that time he was also hanging out with the various crews that frequented the local squat scene of his home town The Hague: DJ TLR’s deep-fried house label Crème Organization and Bunker Records, who threw “acid planet” parties to fund early Unit Moebius releases and would later put out Wolfers’ first 12-inch as Legowelt. He has since produced a colossal amount of music using 20 different aliases; as Legowelt alone he’s released eight full-length albums, including last year’s Crystal Cult 2080, named after the go-to synthesizer for 90s pop production, the Roland JV-2080. Filled with warm tonal mutations, it added glutinous edges to his usual template of grubby acid. Here, Wolfers plays alongside rising locals Schmutz and Peter Gibney, and residents Celestial and Fourth Mind.

The Bunatee, Fri

SC

If you’re one of those people who believe Dry January doesn’t start until the first day of work, or who just finds it impossible to let go of the magic of Christmas, this addendum to New Year celebrations is the reality-suspension device you require. As you’ll be likely somewhat broken by the previous two days, don’t worry: this daytime lineup is full of the dance music equivalent of eating a stuffed-crust Domino’s in bed. Fatboy Slim remains as devoted to hands being held aloft as he did in his 90s heyday, while 2ManyDJs, despite becoming disco dads, are still masters of crowdpleasing. Secondcity, Breach, Ben Pearce and Cyril Hahn are all on hand with minor chords and major house nostalgia, while Erol Alkan could take you in any direction, from the gutter of twisted electro to the stars of proggy techno. Or indeed to a finger-pointing disco funhouse, the kind of vibe that Horse Meat Disco don Severino will be serving. A sideshow attraction while you’re there: spot who’s still going from New Year’s Eve.

Tobacco Dock, E1, Sat

BB

Boldly beginning 2016 with intentions of establishing a new home for techno in Blackpool, a party town crying out for more underground sounds, Resonate starts strong with an appearance from Mark Broom, one of the most reliable and influential British DJs of the past two decades. Initially founding his musical career after visiting Tenerife (rather than Ibiza) in 1989, then in the ecstatic throes of acid house, the following years saw Broom’s sets and ultimately his own productions move into a darker and more relentless but no less hedonistic territory. With a back catalogue of releases on labels such as Robert Hood’s M-Plant and Blueprint, expect heavy and hypnotic kicks in an intimate setting.

The Underbar, Fri

JT

Feeling grey, looking grey, contemplating the greyest of weeks? So are club promoters the world over: the post-New Year fortnight is infamously the year’s driest, whether you’ve taken the zero-booze pledge or not. Brighton’s Patterns club, however, is playing to this quiet time’s strengths by putting on resident DJs from excellent Brighton-and-beyond nights Creus, Charged, Shak Out and Sequence. Between them, they’ve opened for everyone from road-rapper Giggs to cheerful producer Lone, but tonight they’re given main billing in their own right. Enough to spur you through a delicate week.

Patterns, Fri

CJ

No, not the Auto-Tune-favouring rapper, but a new drum’n’bass night from Doc Scott. In September, the DJ, producer and 31 Recordings boss posted a Facebook rant in which he laid into the quality of the UK D&B scene; he then decided to start this new event in order to move away from the pile-’em-high approach of nights whose flyers need 6pt fonts to fit everyone in. Instead, there’ll be longer, more exploratory sets, here played by the likes of Marcus Intalex, Commix and Kid Drama.

Lightbox, SW8, Fri

BB