Future | Winter Sprinter | Alien Ant Farm | Boat-Ting | National Youth Jazz Orchestra | Henry V

One of this Atlanta MC’s pseudonyms is “Future Hendrix”, a shout-out to the guitar great and psychedelic-era poster boy, Jimi. Future doesn’t play the guitar or anything, but in terms of his wide-ranging creativity and his appeal to the pop charts as well as to a more hardcore listener, the comparison isn’t a totally misleading one. Essentially, the rapper covers a lot of ground without seeming as if he’s trying too hard. An MC with a gruff, often Auto-Tuned delivery, it stands to reason that he excels in aggressive street-slash- club anthems, be they his own Fuck Up Some Commas or Ace Hood’s Bugatti, on which he appears. Interestingly, though, that’s far from his only voice. Future is also a singer and his skills make him a good fit with collaborators from Kanye West to Miley Cyrus on more chart-bound material. It’s an OutKast-like display of Atlantan versatility.

O2 Apollo, Manchester, Thu; O2 Academy Brixton, SW9, Fri; touring to 10 Jan

JR

For the past six years, Fortuna POP!’s Winter Sprinter series at the Lexington has provided proof that indie is still a resourceful, self-starting kind of music. Not for this lot a slothful hibernation at the start of the year. Instead, they’re up and at ’em, filled with small-label energy and motivated by the wish to unburden themselves of emotional baggage by way of moderately competent guitar pop. This year’s event does a nice job of representing indie across the ages. We go from its classic 1980s iteration (by way of former Weather Prophets man Pete Astor, Thu), to riot grrl-era punk (from Newcastle’s Milky Wimpshake, Fri), to present-day songwriters such as Steven James Adams (Tue), formerly of the rated but resolutely un-massive Broken Family Band. As an extra treat, a low-key aggregation of musicians will also perform a set of Blur covers, under the name Bleurgh (Fri).

The Lexington, N1, Tue to Fri

JR

“Nu metal”, as the rock sound of 1999 was known, is now not very new at all. Born, like their contemporaries Papa Roach, Korn and Linkin Park, in a minor Californian city, Alien Ant Farm were core proponents of what is now an irrevocably passé scene. At the time, the band distinguished themselves from the throng with a heavy rock cover of Michael Jackson’s Smooth Criminal. Really, though – as current album Always & Forever, on which the band seem generally unchanged, makes plain – their music was never really metal at all. With its Pavlovian hooks, harmonies and choruses, this is pop music – simply conducted with loud guitars.

Craufurd Arms, Milton Keynes, Tue; O2 Institute Birmingham, Wed; The Glasgow, Garage, Thu; Rock City, Nottingham, Fri; touring to 21 Jan

JR

Boat-Ting is the sort of night that shouldn’t exist any more. A scene-led improv and poetry meet-up in central London, held on the first Monday of the month, it’s been happening on a boat moored on the Victoria Embankment near Temple for more than 13 years. Kickstarting the new year and shooing away the last dregs of that lingering hangover will be a set from London stalwart Steve Beresford, playing electronics with double bassist John Edwards and trombonist Sarah Gail Brand. Headlining are Barrel, a trio of violin, viola and cello who all use their instruments’ strings, body and bridge to draw out extended tones, scratched and plucked dissonances and rich half-forgotten orchestral vignettes. Along with these two trios, there is a clarinet and poetry piece from Alex Ward and Sibyl Madrigal, and Edwards also performs with Ian MacGowan and Pete McPhail.

Bar & Co, WC2, Mon  

JA

When the first National Youth Jazz Orchestra was formed by sax-playing schoolteacher Bill Ashton in 1965, most repertoires were respectfully American, and big-band jazz often meant a brash swing sound from the distant lindyhopping days before rock. Now, UK jazz is international and independent, and the NYJO (Amy Winehouse and trumpeter-composer Guy Barker were both members) play a more eclectic and home-brewed style of contemporary music. Here, they showcase their 50th-birthday release, NYJO Fifty, an album comprising a powerful tracklist that includes Julian Siegel’s rhythmically devious Mama Badgers and Zoe Rahman’s pulsating Red Squirrel.

Ronnie Scott’s, W1, Wed & Thu

JF

By the end of 2016, the 400-year anniversary of Shakespeare’s death will have been used as the pretext for all manner of programmes and concert series. So the City Of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and its chief guest conductor Edward Gardner are getting in early, while the idea of a Shakespeare-themed programme still seems a novel one. This programme includes two compositions based on Macbeth, alongside Vaughan Williams’s Three Shakespeare Songs. But the most substantial piece promises to be Henry V: A Shakespeare Scenario, created by the composer-arranger Christopher Palmer using William Walton’s score for Olivier’s celebrated screen adaptation.

Symphony Hall, Thu

AC

 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information. 