Mathilde Milwidsky, 21, selected for Menuhin competition, having learned to play on a violin loaned by benefactor

A young violinist who borrowed an instrument from a music-loving benefactor because her family could not afford to buy one has been shortlisted for one of the world’s most prestigious music competitions.

Mathilde Milwidsky, 21, from London, is in the running for the 2016 Menuhin competition, founded by the violinist Yehudi Menuhin more than 30 years ago and considered to be the “Olympics of the violin”.

She is one of three Britons – the competition’s highest UK representation for 20 years – picked from a record-breaking 300 entrants from 40 countries. The contest is the world’s leading competition for musicians under 22, and many of its winners have gone on to international fame.

Milwidsky, currently in her third year at the Royal Academy of Music, was offered a place at Cambridge University and scholarships from all the London conservatoires. She turned down Cambridge to pursue a career as a performer – “ideally, [as] a soloist and chamber musician,” she said. “I feel very proud to be representing Britain.”

Milwidsky’s mother is a single parent who works as a learning and support assistant for maths at a state school in north London. Milwidsky has never met her father.

She paid tribute to the support of both her mother and the benefactor who lent her a 1750s Landolfi violin after they were introduced by a sixth form teacher who recognised Milwidsky’s potential.

Milwidsky recalled: “I went to play for him and he decided to lend me an instrument.” She is overwhelmed by his generosity – her family could not have afforded such and instrument – and they remain in constant touch.

The benefactor, who asked not to be named, told the Guardian Milwidsky was “an exceptional talent”. He added: “I’ve always tried to help players as much as I could.”

György Pauk, a performer and the Academy’s professor of violin, said of his student: “She was born for the stage … I predict that she is going to be a very fine soloist and chamber music player – certainly very rare among British players. To be accepted at the Menuhin competition is already a big achievement.”

The other two British contestants are Louisa Staples, currently studying at the Yehudi Menuhin School, which the violinist founded in 1963 children, and Juliette Roos, one of its recent graduates.

Roos, 20, from London, comes from a family of musicians and is now training in Switzerland. She said she feels “incredibly privileged” to be on the shortlist.

Staples, the daughter of professional musicians, is the competition’s youngest ever senior contestant having, at 15, missed the junior category by a month. She said: “I wasn’t expecting to get through as many of the contestants are a lot older than me. So I was really pleased.

“To be a soloist is my ultimate dream. I’d love to have my own quartet or trio as well.” She added that Menuhin had been an inspiration both as an extraordinary musician and through his dedication to nurturing young musicians.

The Menuhin competition returns to the UK in April, as part of an 11-day festival at the Southbank Centre and other venues, that will include major concerts with internationally renowned soloists and orchestras.

As Britain usually has either no contenders or just one, Milwidsky, Roos and Staples represent the highest number of homegrown entrants in more than 20 years. Of this year’s applicants 60% were from Asia – mainly Korea, Japan and China.

Last year, the cellist Julian Lloyd Webber warned of a crisis in British music education. He said that in countries such as China playing an instrument was the norm while, in the UK, “children will go through their entire education without playing an instrument or without hearing music by any of the great composers”.

The Menuhin competition’s artistic director, Gordon Back, spoke of the encouragement of overseas parents and discipline as factors that may explain the success of young musicians elsewhere. Of the 300 entrants, only three should not have applied, he said. “The standard is really extraordinary.”

The 2016 Menuhin competition, in which 44 shortlisted violinists will compete, marks Menuhin’s centenary. The organisers were surprised to discover that of the 22 seniors (under 22s), there is only one boy, while only seven boys will compete against 15 girls in the junior section (under 16s).

First prize for seniors includes international concerts, a one-year loan of a golden period Stradivarius violin – by J&A Beare, leading dealers – and £10,000 in cash. Five of this year’s nine jurors are former Menuhin prize-winners and internationally acclaimed performers. They include the British violinist Tasmin Little, who won third prize at the inaugural event in 1983.