Singer who performed her own arrangements of songs made famous by her father, Nat King Cole, on her 1991 hit album Unforgettable… With Love

Natalie Cole, who has died of heart failure aged 65, shot to stardom with her debut album, Inseparable, in 1975. Subsequently she experienced the extremes of huge commercial success and debilitating periods of illness and drug addiction, but found the resilience to bounce back. In 2009 she enjoyed one of the biggest hit albums of her career with Still Unforgettable, which won her the last of her nine Grammy Awards.

Living in the shadow of a famous parent is never easy, and Natalie initially resisted being labelled “the daughter of Nat King Cole”. “I had to be myself, singing my songs in my own way,” she explained. Yet the summit of her career arrived with her 1991 album Unforgettable... With Love, on which she sang her own arrangements of songs made famous by her father such as Smile, Mona Lisa and Nature Boy.

On Unforgettable (the song), she closed the dynastic circle by duetting with her father’s recorded voice, and the track gave her a top 20 pop hit in both Britain and the US. The single won her Grammys for Record of the Year and Best Traditional Pop Performance, while the Unforgettable album, a chart-topper in the US, won Album of the Year. It also sold 7m copies in the US alone, and doubled that figure through international sales.

Before addiction problems in the early 1980s led to Cole spending six months in the Hazelden drug treatment facility in Connecticut, she had notched up a string of successful albums and singles.

Inseparable topped the R&B chart and reached the US pop top 20, spinning off No 1 R&B hits with the title track and This Will Be (An Everlasting Love). The follow-ups Natalie, Unpredictable and Thankful all hit the top 20 pop charts, Unpredictable again topping the R&B listings and generating an R&B No 1 with the single I’ve Got Love on My Mind. Both Unpredictable and Thankful earned platinum status (Thankful was boosted by the hit single Our Love), making Cole the first female artist to achieve two platinum records in one year (1977). I Love You So and We’re The Best of Friends (the latter a duet album with Peabo Bryson), both from 1979, continued her winning streak.

But the stresses of success were taking their toll. Cole clashed bitterly with her record company and her marriage to the songwriter and producer (and Baptist minister) Marvin Yancy in 1976 came to an end after four years. Yancy died in 1985. Her hectic working schedule exacerbated a drug habit dating back to the early 70s, to disastrous effect. “As my success escalated, so did the drug problem,” she told the Washington Post. It would not be until 1987 that she began to put her career back on track.

Cole was born in Los Angeles to Nat and his wife, Maria Hawkins Ellington, a former singer with the bands of Benny Carter, Fletcher Henderson and Duke Ellington (though the Ellington in her name was from her first husband, Spurgeon Ellington). The Coles had already adopted a niece, Carol, but Natalie was their first biological child. The family had recently bought a house in the upmarket Hancock Park district, the first black family to do so, and suffered a great deal of racist hostility as a result.

Regular visitors to the Cole home included Sarah Vaughan, Aretha Franklin, Ella Fitzgerald, Lena Horne, Ellington and Count Basie, and Natalie appeared on one of her father’s Christmas albums when she was six. She practised singing into a tape recorder Nat gave her, and made her professional singing debut with her father in 1961, performing I’m With You at the Greek theatre in Los Angeles. She was sent to Northfield Mount prep school in New England, which she attended until Nat died of lung cancer in 1965.

She then returned to California, badly affected by his death, but her mother remarried and moved the family to Massachusetts. Natalie, who was not yet planning a musical career, enrolled at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst to study child psychology, graduating in 1972. While at university she went through a rebellious phase, joining the Black Panthers and demonstrating against the Vietnam war.

“I was raised in a very protected environment and didn’t have a lot of black friends as a child,” she told the Guardian’s Lucy O’Brien. “When I went to college I realised I was a black person too. It was a great eye-opener for me, which is why I got involved.” Also at college she began dabbling in heroin and LSD.

At university she played some club gigs with the soul band Black Magic, then after graduation worked to develop her talents as a solo singer, mixing soul, jazz and rock styles. She was spotted by the Chicago-based producers Chuck Jackson and Yancy, who invited her to record some of their songs. They circulated these around the record companies, and Capitol, her father’s label, signed her. In 1975 the label released Inseparable, it sold half a million copies, and she was on her way, even though that year she was also arrested for heroin possession in Toronto.

Her post-rehab career was reignited by 1987’s Everlasting, her first album under a new deal with EMI-Manhattan Records, which sold 1m copies and launched the singles Jump Start (My Heart), I Live for Your Love and the top five hit Pink Cadillac, written by Bruce Springsteen. She followed up with 1989’s Good to Be Back, which delivered a top 10 single in Britain and the US with Miss You Like Crazy. Then came her apotheosis with Unforgettable.

After that, Cole’s work inclined towards standards (as on the albums Take A Look, Stardust, Still Unforgettable and Ask A Woman Who Knows) and Christmas albums (she recorded three between 1994 and 2008), interspersed with some urban contemporary on Snowfall on the Sahara (1999) and a collection of pop and rock covers, Leavin’ (2006). Her most recent album was Natalie Cole En Español (2013), featuring versions of songs that her father had sung in Spanish.

In 2000 she published an autobiography, Angel on My Shoulder, which startled many with its no holds barred accounts of arrests, drug abuse and her sexual abuse by a family member. Also that year she starred as herself in Livin’ for Love: The Natalie Cole Story, a television movie based on her book. She made assorted film and television appearances throughout her career, appearing in music specials and in drama series such as Gray’s Anatomy, Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip, and Law & Order: Special Victims Unit.

In 2008 she announced that she had hepatitis C, which she ascribed to past intravenous drug use. She subsequently suffered double kidney failure, and after making a public request for a kidney donation received one in 2009.She described her struggle for a kidney transplant in her memoir Love Brought Me Back, 2010.

After her divorce from Yancy she married the producer Andre Fischer in 1989 and Kenneth Dupree in 2001; these marriages too ended in divorce. She is survived by her son from her first marriage, Robbie Yancy, a professional musician who used to play in her touring band.

• Natalie Maria Cole, singer, born 6 February 1950; died 31 December 2015