The Paris-based Australian violinist reflects on being in Nick Cave’s favourite live band, long-term collaborations and living in Paris after the attacks

For a musician and composer whose work has such a precise and nuanced grasp of atmosphere and connotation, the word that strikes you most when interviewing the Australia-born, France-based Warren Ellis is “accident”.

Ellis is the longtime bandmate and collaborator of Nick Cave; he joined the Bad Seeds in 1995, is one of the Grinderman lineup, and has established a much-hailed reputation as Cave’s co-composer on film soundtracks, creating memorably haunting scores for films including The Proposition, The Assassination of Jesse James and The Road.

A brilliant multi-instrumentalist as well as musical creator, his aesthetic range has furnished the distinctive sound of Australian bands from the Blackeyed Susans to Kim Salmon and the Surrealists. His international collaborators have included Marianne Faithfull and Cat Power. Right now, he’s in Australia to appear at Sydney festival and Sugar Mountain festival with Dirty Three, the influential instrumental trio he formed in 1992 with Mick Turner and Jim White, and of which Cave became a fan. Cave describes Dirty Three as “my favourite live band. No contest”.

And yet for all his talent and renown, Ellis is humble about his musical good fortune. “Everything that’s happened to me has been an accident,” he insists.

He was raised in Ballarat, an old gold rush city in western Victoria, and fate struck Ellis at the local rubbish dump when he was 10 years old. “It’s where I used to pass my time as a kid,” he says, “I used to hang out there, with my brothers – we’d ride our bikes and do the kind of things that would make me shriek in horror if I knew my kids were doing it.”

Yet it was here Ellis had “the biggest accident” of his life; stumbling upon an abandoned piano accordion, which he then took to school. “My teacher at the time played so he taught me how to play it,” says Ellis. “And that led me to learn the violin – by accident, again. Someone asked if anyone wanted to learn it – some girls put their hands up and so did I.”

Growing up meant moving east to Melbourne, and for a time music appealed to Ellis “more as a listener than a player”; he preferred Black Sabbath and AC/DC, a style of music from which his own instrumental practice seemed very far away. But as Ellis found himself “by accident” increasingly playing in Melbourne, what he liked about rock’n’roll he realised he could channel into the instruments he had. “I put a pickup on a violin and it felt like I was doing something,” he says of the breakthough. “It was a way of engaging in life that felt significant.”

His luck was to make this discovery in the right place at the right time among a small group of like-minded creative musicians with whom he still does the bulk of his work. “I’ve worked with Nick for 20 years and with the Dirty Three for 25,” he explains. “They’re long creative relationships, and long friendships, too.”

Ellis is a gentle and compelling storyteller, as comfortable describing a father who played guitar and sang country songs as he is the spiritual connection he finds in music. He’s reflective about what it means to be a musician, especially what it means to play the violin. “It seems like an odd career choice or something now these days,” he says of the musician’s life. 

“I’m of an age now that I’ve seen the internet come and I’ve seen changes and we have to adapt. I’ve had to modify what I do to work within the changes, everyone does … but I still feel like I work within an old craft. I walk into a violin shop and it’s entering another world, one where time stops.”

Similarly, he considers the musical experience as an otherworld that “exists within itself” – “a place to get away from things … a place to dream.” It’s an attitude that has a palpable quality in the sound of Dirty Three. It’s variously described by reviewers as “a series of beautifully desolate valleys”, “the feeling of waves lapping and pouring into and out of one another” or “a thousand-yard stare”.

Ellis lives with his partner and teenage sons in Paris, his home of 17 years. The “atrocious acts” committed there in November have, he says, affirmed his connection to that city, despite his fear it may be “just the beginning of things” there. 

He tells me his sons are having discussions at school about how to respond to terror attacks, and that he went to place flowers on the city’s memorials in the days after it happened and noted though the people were still coming out, the mood was both “shocked and tired”. “Such an arbitrary attack,” he reflects, “it could have been anyone – sitting and having a coffee or going to see a band.”

Our conversation circles back on chance and luck. Ellis was supposed to be at the Eagles of Death Metal concert in the Bataclan on the night the terrorist attack took place. “And I didn’t go,” he says, softly. “Another accident.”