First they took on the boys in Madrid, now the Spanish group are charming Europe with their rickety rock’n’roll. What’s their secret?

In the past year, Hinds have emerged as the indie gang that everyone wants to join. They’ve played shows with the Strokes, the Libertines and Mac DeMarco, become the first Spanish band to appear on one of Glastonbury’s main stages, and incited so many stage invasions that it’s a wonder they bother with barriers at all. It’s easy to see why fans will risk the bouncers’ ire to get onstage with them: Hinds’ rickety rock’n’roll songs are charming because of their total lack of artifice, and their shows fizz with the highwire sense that they could collapse at any moment.

Bowling down the streets of their hometown, Madrid, Hinds can barely make it a block without bumping into a friend, fan or fellow musician. They duck into their favourite hangout, Bar Sidi in downtown Malasaña, where the only thing exciting the balding clientele is the Real Madrid match on the telly.

“I think the owners like us because we’re the youngest people who ever come in here,” says Carlotta Cosials, one half of Hinds’ songwriting duo and a fast-talking flurry of curls. Every time the band try to leave, another round of Mahous appears unbidden on the bar, gratis. They like this place because it’s close to Plaza del Dos de Mayo, where they drink outside in summer, but uncool enough to offer respite from Madrid’s garage rock scene, a competitive field from which Hinds have emerged the city’s breakout stars.

When they first started going to shows, Carlotta and fellow frontwoman Ana García Perrote were happy to just be fans. They had met through their then-boyfriends’ band, the name of which they’ve now forgotten. “I think they were called Teenage Wasteland for a bit,” says Ana.

“They had horrible taste in names,” Carlotta laughs. “We spent so many Fridays at the rehearsal room watching them play and we never had any impulse to say: ‘Hey, can you lend me the guitar for a moment?’ It seemed so clear – the boys play, the girls watch.”

Something changed in the summer of 2011, however, when Carlotta and Ana went on holiday together and picked up guitars for the first time. Soon they had planned a covers set and even played a couple of gigs, the first exuberant, the second calamitous. “It was horrible,” says Carlotta. “We didn’t rehearse. We were so ashamed we stopped the band.”

They agreed never to speak of it again, but two years later in the winter of 2013 they started over, this time writing for themselves. They put their first two songs, Trippy Gum and Bamboo, up on Bandcamp under the name Deers (they hads to change their name to Hinds after a legal threat from Canadian band the Dears). The EP was not only picked up by NME but allowed them to play a small but sold-out show in London soon afterwards.

Just around the corner from Bar Sidi is El Restaurante Vegetariano, run by Carlotta’s aunt . In February 2014, she and Ana pushed all the tables to one side and performed their own songs live for the first time. It went well, but they knew they needed bandmates. Their DJ friend Ade Martín joined on bass, with Amber Grimbergen, who they spotted on Facebook, on drums. In a town full of musicians, everyone wanted to know why they hadn’t gone for more experienced – or more male – members. They knew how that would have looked. “We thought that if we got boys, everyone would think they were writing and we were just smiling,” says Ana.

From their first show as a four-piece, a Battle Of The Bands at the Wurlitzer Ballroom, the band were acutely aware people were waiting for them to mess up. “We took it so seriously,” says Carlotta. “We knew that if we made a mistake, they would eat us up like a little lamb surrounded by wolves.”

Being an all-girl band in Madrid’s male-driven scene hasn’t made life easy for them, and the speed at which they have catapulted into the affections of the British music press goes some way to explaining the lingering resentment they’ve dealt with.

“We didn’t want people to talk about us being girls,” says Ana. “We decided that we were going to dress as boys and act as boys. It didn’t work. Everyone noticed we were girls. Everybody was talking about whether we’re cute or not.”

In response, they addressed the jibes about their success in the best way possible: by writing better songs than anyone else. The narcotic bliss of Garden and the punk clatter of San Diego are simply catchier than December flu. Ducking out away from the football match on the television to smoke cigarettes, Carlotta considers the doubters. “Other bands say we’re only successful because we’re girls, or because we have good management,” she shrugs. “I say they should write a song as good as Bamboo.”

Perhaps it’s obvious, then, why they’ve called their debut album Leave Me Alone. It’s also ramshackle and honest, just as they wanted it.

“There are a lot of girls in pop, but pop is about perfection,” says Carlotta. “We’re the opposite. We get messages on Instagram from girls – and boys – in their rooms, listening to our songs and just being free. They feel they can do it, too. They see us and see that it’s OK not to be perfect”

Leave Me Alone is out on Friday on Lucky Number