Featuring Axl Rose, Slash and Duff McKagan, festival marks first time founding members of Guns N’ Roses have played together since disbanding in mid-1990s

Less than a week after reports that hinted at the headliners, Coachella has confirmed that Guns N’ Roses and LCD Soundsystem will both re-form for the California festival, which will be held over two weekends in April.

A full lineup announcement has also been made, which includes Calvin Harris, Ice Cube, Sia, Grimes, Sufjan Stevens, M83, Run the Jewels and Courtney Barnett.

Fronted by singer-songwriter and producer James Murphy, co-founder of the seminal label DFA records, LCD Soundsystem will headline both Friday nights, re-forming for the first time since retiring in April 2011. Their reunion ends months of rumours, which culminated in the release of a new track on Christmas Eve: Christmas Will Break Your Heart.

But perhaps the biggest news is the revival of the original Guns N’ Roses, who will headline both Saturday nights. The band will reportedly feature Axl Rose, Slash and Duff McKagan, marking the first time the founding members of Guns N’ Roses have played together since disbanding in the mid-1990s. Rose retained the moniker in the aftermath, touring with an ever-revolving lineup and releasing the long-awaited Chinese Democracy in 2008. His longstanding feud with Slash, which lasted two decades, came to an end in 2014. “It was probably way overdue, you know,” Slash told Sweden’s Aftonbladet. 

Rumours of a reunion were sparked recently after the band’s website and Facebook received a makeover; meanwhile, several people have reported a mysterious trailer featuring brief clips of the band’s song Welcome To the Jungle airing before screenings of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

Both Slash and McKagan have confirmed their involvement in the reunion on social media, but it’s unknown if the band’s two other founding members, Izzy Stradlin and Steven Adler, will join them at Coachella. The announcement was expected to be made by Axl Rose during Tuesday night’s Jimmy Kimmel Live, but Rose cancelled his appearance on the program due to what an unnamed source is calling “unforeseen circumstances”.

pic.twitter.com/Qyf466FqWa

The full lineup of Coachella Valley music and arts festival also features Rae Sremmurd, Chvrches, Major Lazer, Miike Snow, Rancid, Flume, Jack Ü, Death Grips, Beach House, Silversun Pickups, A$AP Rocky, Purity Ring, Deerhunter, Unknown Mortal Orchestra, Bat for Lashes, Lush, Hudson Mohawke, HEALTH and the Kills.

Coachella will take place in Indio, California, from 15 to 17 April and 22 to 24 April, with tickets on sale Wednesday 6 January at 11am PST.