With their homoerotic image and Nazi-baiting lyrics, Gabi Delgado-López and Robert Görl were synth-disco rebels bent on pulverising the rulebook

The early 80s was a golden age for pop duos: OMD, Soft Cell, Associates, Tears for Fears, Blancmange, Yazoo, Cabaret Voltaire, Wham! It was as though the four- or five-piece rock group was suddenly a defunct, cumbersome relic of a bygone era.

Somehow, the sleek two-piece – generally a flamboyant, energetic frontman with his dour, trusty musical sidekick – suited this modernist new dawn, shorn of the baggage or excess of the conventional band. King Crimson’s Robert Fripp had predicted this updated, more adaptable mode back in 1974 when, in an interview with Melody Maker, he heralded the future of the performing and recording outfit as “small, mobile, independent and intelligent units”. DAF were this writ large. 

DAF (standing for Deutsch-Amerikanische Freundschaft, which means German-American Friendship) actually started out in Düsseldorf in 1978 as a five-member operation, with a guitarist, bassist and drummer. Only with their third album, 1981’s Alles Ist Gut, did they cement their identity as an electronic duo.

DAF were not so much an atypical early-80s pairing – although they were the sole Europeans among their class – as they were the most extreme example of the form. In fact, in this respect they had more in common with a double act from a slightly earlier period: New York’s Suicide. In terms of provocation and brutal electro-noise, the Spanish-born Gabi Delgado-López (vocals) and Robert Görl (drums and assorted instruments) most resembled Alan Vega and Martin Rev. 

DAF were ultra-intense electro-punks intent on tearing up the rulebook (and they had the muscles to do it). They spent interviews railing against “Anglo-American pop imperialism” and its rockist atavism. They might have offered a raw, stripped-down, back-to-basics sound – “techno-primitivism”, as the critic Simon Reynolds called it – but it had nothing to do with rock’n’roll. Nor did they fit into any neat German-electronic scheme: their pulverising, jagged synth-disco was as far from Kraftwerk’s pristine soundscapes as it was possible to get.

Similarly, their homoerotic image was the diametric opposite of the smart-suited Mensch-Maschine of Kraftwerk. The cover of Alles Ist Gut showed a naked Delgado on one side of the sleeve, his postpunk crew cut and torso seemingly glowing from a workout, and Görl equally lustrous and hard-bodied on the other. And the 1981 follow-up LP, Gold und Liebe, featured the pair together on the front, all rippling, glistening forearms and black leather. 

The implication was that, unlike the Rolling Stones and their generation, this lot had definitely got Satisfaction. And counter to the punks, this wouldn’t be an awkward “three minutes of squelching noises” – you could imagine DAF having sex, and enjoying it. In a way, Delgado-López and Görl were a dry run for Frankie Goes to Hollywood’s self-styled “ferocious homosexuals” Holly Johnson and Paul Rutherford.

Not that they were gay: Delgado-López was bisexual, Görl apparently straight. Still, this was music for Germany’s hardest-core nightclubs, gay or otherwise. DAF took disco’s pleasure principles and aerobic imperatives – remember the Michael Zager Band’s 1977 disco hit Let’s All Chant with its delirious refrain of “Your body, my body / Everybody work your body”? – and exaggerated them several-fold.

In an even bolder move – the Third Reich still being within living memory for many Germans – they were reclaiming the martial and turning it into a forbidden pleasure. Sex and notions of will-to-power and rigid self-empowerment (Absolute Körpekontrolle, or Absolute Body Control, a song on Gold und Liebe, was one of their finer moments) were wildly conflated in DAF’s music and imagery. 

There was obviously some taunting and subverting going on here vis-a-vis the nation’s then-recent history and Nazism’s fascist notions of physical perfection. Meanwhile, a track such as Muskel (from Gold und Liebe), with its spasming, sequenced post-Moroder pulse, sped-up marching beats and Delgado’s guttural exhortations, was a camp enactment of totalitarian manoeuvres. On their best-known track, Der Mussolini – on which the listener is invited to variously “tanz [dance] der Mussolini” and “tanz der Adolf Hitler” – the century’s most reviled dictators are mocked for their stentorian speech and stiff-legged marching style, reducing them to a novelty dancefloor craze. 

This was hedonism as heroism at a time, just after punk, when the idea of going disco seemed brazen, and funk was radical: groups such as ABC talked in terms of “the radical dance faction” and Ze Records and its ilk entreated us to variously “dance till the bomb drops” and “fuck art, let’s dance”. This was motion as threat, Trance as Mission.

And it proved incredibly popular: DAF were one of the five biggest-selling acts in Germany in 1981, not to mention NME cover stars – as well as immeasurably influential. They were hailed by John Peel as “the godfathers of techno” and cited as crucial to the development of Detroit techno and Chicago house. And listening to El Que, with its rubbery looped pulse courtesy of the Korg-DS10, is like hearing acid house six years ahead of schedule. Everything from EBM – whether it stands for Electronic/Euro Body Music or Efficient Brusque Modernity – to EDM starts round about here.

Delgado-López and Görl are still occasionally trading as DAF, and both are still releasing music, some of it – up to and including the album Delgado-López released last year, 2 – very fine indeed. But it’s their manically propulsive early work that means DAF will live Für Immer.