From a Canadian folk trio sure to become a festival favourite to country-edged duets with Everly Brothers charm, here are a few songs to start the year

The most consistently adventurous female singer in Africa is back in February with a new album and an in-the-round show at London’s Roundhouse. She is backed on the record by guitars and n’goni and her special guests include John Paul Jones. Among Né So’s best songs are an exquisite treatment of Billie Holiday’s Strange Fruit and this, the title track, a pained lament for the migration crisis.

Teddy Thompson has teamed up with the American singer Kelly Jones to make a glorious set of country-edged duets that at their best have the easy charm of the Everly Brothers. The resulting album, Little Windows, is not released until April, but Jones and Thompson are previewing the new songs at a low-key show at St Pancras Old Church in London on 25 January, when they will no doubt include this new lament, which already sounds like a weepie standard.

Raised in a refugee camp in the Algerian desert, Aziza Brahim is an exile from Western Sahara, a territory that was invaded by Morocco when Spanish colonists pulled out. Brahim, who has spent much of her life in Cuba and Spain, writes about the problems of her homeland. She looks set to become the most prominent Saharawi singer, following the death of the great Mariem Hassan. This is a song from her forthcoming album, Abbar el Hamada, which will be released by Glitterbeat in March.

Champion Doug Veitch was one of the great heroes of the 1980s, praised by the likes of John Peel as the “king of Caledonian cajun swing” for his skill in blending global styles. He’ll be touring again in the spring and has released an EP, The King, which includes a revival of this jaunty reggae song. Here’s the original version from 1984.

There’s an inspired music scene in southern Italy that includes the Naples-based band Vesevo. Their fine violinist, Antonio Fraioli, is best known for his work with another great band from the city, Spaccanapoli. That group were signed to Peter Gabriel’s Real World label and wrote the song Vesuvio, which featured on a soundtrack to The Sopranos. It includes some inspired percussion work.

The East Pointers, from Prince Edward Island on Canada’s east coast, are a fiddle, banjo and guitar trio who play stomping original tunes that sound like Celtic standards. They need to improve their songwriting, but they are great instrumentalists and could well become folk festival favourites this summer.

This trio of Malian griots have a remarkable history. Singer Hawa Kasse Mady Diabaté is the daughter of the great singer Kasse Mady Diabaté; Lassana Diabaté is a balafon virtuoso who has worked with Toumani Diabaté and AfroCubism; and Mamadou Kouyate, on bass n’goni, is the son of n’goni genius Bassekou Kouyate. They released an EP last year have a much-anticipated collaboration set with Kronos Quartet coming out in 2017. This month, they are playing at Celtic Connections, in Glasgow, and at London’s British Library. Here they are with Kronos, performing a classic griot song in 2014.

Here’s yet another classy new English duo, featuring the accordion player Paul Hutchinson, best known as a member of Belshazzar’s Feast, and the composer and experimental clarinet player Karen Wimhurst. They describe their debut album, Clarion, as folk-jazz fusion, and it includes this elegant track, Hymn.

One of the great Afrobeat albums of last year came from Brazil. Bixiga 70 are from São Paulo, are massively influenced by Fela Kuti (their name, after all, is a reminder of Kuti’s band Africa 70), but they are no copyists. Their album 111 featured impressive brass and percussion work, such as on the instrumental track 100% 13.

I hadn’t expected to feature a vintage Kinks track in this, or any other playlist. But it happened to be the best song I heard over the Christmas period. As a longstanding Kinks fan, I was delighted that Ray Davies came on to sing this at the finale of Dave’s solo show in London last month. It was the first time the brothers have been on stage together since the Kinks broke up in 1996, and they sounded tremendous. Here’s how they played it in the 60s.

 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information. 