Once marooned in obscurity, 80s indie pop pioneer Pete Astor is back thanks to new acts discovering his deadpan charm

James Dean Bradfield was flicking through his seven-inches for BBC4 doc Music For Misfits: The Story Of Indie last year when he stopped at the Weather Prophets’ 1986 debut single Almost Prayed. “One of the best guitar groups who never sold a million…” was what Bradfield said of Pete Astor’s band, although most viewers could have been forgiven for saying: “Who that?”

While fellow “misfits” such as the Smiths did go on to sell six figures, Astor never quite reached the same heights. His first band, indie rock janglers the Loft – one of Creation Records’ earliest signings – disbanded in 1985 and his next, the Weather Prophets (similar jangle, more finesse), didn’t stand a chance when they signed to a major label more interested in the recoupable likes of pop smoothies Johnny Hates Jazz. “We knew the deal,” he laughs. “In the first week, we sold more than Elton John but that was that.” 

Today, Astor’s fame may not stretch beyond the kind of indie fan who gets excited about new bands featuring ex-members of Talulah Gosh, but his influence is quietly abundant. His former manager Alan McGee once called him the next Dylan, though Astor’s crestfallen, kitchen-sink style is more Leonard Cohen at Wimpy. You can hear it in Belle And Sebastian’s bittersweet storytelling, Darren Hayman’s wry reflections on city life, and in indie pop’s latest renaissance, where new acts such as esoteric singer-songwriter Ralegh Long, motorik poppers Teleman and lo-fi storytellers Ultimate Painting are reinvigorating Astor’s style of deadpan confessional. The latter band’s 2015 album Green Lanes in particular has all the hallmarks of Astor: wistful Go Betweens-y pop songs cut with home truths.

Perhaps it’s unsurprising that Astor, now a music lecturer, taught Ultimate Painting’s James Hoare at London’s Goldsmiths University. And that it was Hoare who convinced a sceptical Astor to make another record.

“Pete is the master of less is more,” says Hoare, who recorded Astor’s new album Spilt Milk at his lo-fi home studio and provided a one-man backing band. Astor’s unchanged approach – first takes and imperfectly clever songs – also appeals to new-guard DIY bands. And sometimes it’s a case of letting relevancy find you.

“Philip Larkin said the songs you write are not necessarily the songs you want to write,” says Astor about getting his mojo back. “Suddenly it was: ‘This is just what I do.’” He could, he explains, be making something more hip, but no: “I paint small paintings of landscapes. Reinventing the wheel is not what I am.”

What he is is someone who can write the prettiest ditty about drinking too much

 you’re likely to hear (Spilt Milk’s Very Good Lock). With songs as endearing as that, who wants change?

Spilt Milk is released on Friday 8 January; Pete Astor plays the Fortuna POP! Winter Sprinter, The Lexington, N1, Thursday 7 January

• This article was amended on 15 August 2016. An earlier version misinterpreted the meaning of Very Good Lock.