There were waves of sadness when last week’s Readers Recommend was announced as the final column. But we’ve been listening to what you said…

Last Thursday’s Readers Recommend – your favourite tracks and playlists – produced an unusually emotional comments thread. It was the last RR column in the iteration so many people have come to love, and a great many people wanted to express that love. A little more than 10 years since Dorian Lysnkey wrote the first ever column, Songs about Change, on 16 September 2005, we’ve decided to use the end of the year to bring it to a halt in its current format.

Since that first column it has been through a number of lives, overseen by Dorian, then Maddy Costa, Paul MacInnes and Jon Dennis, before being taken on by a combination of you, the readers, and a Guardian overseer: first Adam Boult, and then Peter Kimpton. Along the way, many other writers – me included – have taken on the occasional column.

But 10 and a bit years, and several thousand songs later, we’re saying goodbye to it, after a run that is remarkable by the standards of any column. It’s been an incredible place – of generosity of spirit and knowledge, where reader talks unto reader and everyone comes away happy. However, the current way of doing things consumes a lot of time and energy at our end – which you don’t see – and we can’t keep it going in its familiar format.

That’s the format that’s brought us lists of songs about the oddest topics: it’s the only place that could provide you with an A-Z of playlists compiling music about ascension, buses, capital punishment, doctors, estimates of distance and time, fruit, geometrical shapes, hatchet jobs, innuendo, journalism, keys and locks, life lessons, mammals, nerds and geeks, one-night stands, prostitution, questions, rodents, smuggling, taxis, uncertainty, vim, whisky and youth cults (even RR was no match for X and Z.

This cessation of activities, though, doesn’t mean it’s the necessarily the end for ever. We know and appreciate that the RR community is a very special one and we’re looking at ways to build a new place for it within the Guardian. Bear with us, please, and let’s see what we can do. 