This all-girl tribute to the Ramones keep the punk flag flying, but you are left wondering what they would sound like performing their own material.

Nostalgia was kryptonite to punks, who would have been appalled if they could have foreseen the range of events planned for 2016 – and supported by the Heritage Lottery Fund, no less – to mark punk’s 40th anniversary. The first is the 10-day Resolution festival at the 100 Club, scene of 1976’s Punk Special showcase, which saw the movement shift from gobby subculture to culture-altering new broom. Resolution’s lineup is filled with the handful of first-wavers still working, including UK Subs and, on opening night, the Ramonas.

The original Ramones – whose last surviving member, drummer Tommy Erdelyi, died in 2014 – probably would have relished the idea of the flag being kept flying by four young British women called Cloey, Rohnny, Pee Pee and Margy (the last named in memory of Tommy’s replacement, Marky). The Ramonas have had their work cut out since forming in 2004: not only must they cleave to the spirit of 76 – whipping out 30 Ramones songs in an hour while radiating impassive delinquency – they also need to correct the belief held by many millennials that the Ramones are just a logo on a Topshop T-shirt.

Tonight there’s no fear on the latter score. The smallish crowd, some wearing bondage pants and rigid Mohicans, are old enough to remember things as they were. A six-man moshpit forms at the front and enjoys thrusting laterally; Sheena is a Punk Rocker encourages it to near-combust. The Ramonas rip through Cretin Hop, Rockaway Beach and the other hits, plus murky outliers such as Somebody Put Something in My Drink. Their renditions are faithful to the letter, though Scottish singer Lisa “Cloey” Breyer diverges from the static Joey Ramone template by hurtling across the stage. Yet what comes to mind isn’t the Ramones so much as their contemporaries the Runaways and riot grrrls L7. You leave wondering what this spirited foursome would sound like performing their own material.

• At Brudenell Social Club, Leeds, 25 February. Box office: 0113-275 2411. Then touring.