Adams’s everyman quality shines through as his disillusioned voice melts easy melodies while issuing witty asides.

Having survived two bands and weathered the waters of critical praise and commercial indifference, singer-songwriter Steven James Adams should be ready for anything. But headlining the first night of the Fortuna Pop! label’s week-long Winter Sprinter – an annual indie love-in - he admits to being “quite nervous”. “By the end I’ll be a cocky bastard and you’ll start to relax,” he says, reassuring himself as much as the silent, reverent crowd.

It doesn’t help that Adams is alone on stage with only an acoustic guitar for company. Or, as he points out, that he begins with three new songs from his second solo album, Old Magick, due to be released in March. But Adams draws justified confidence from leading cult heroes Broken Family Band and jaunty rockers Singing Adams, and from the quality of his new material. The delicate warmth of Modern Opinions’s easy melody melts under Adams’s disillusioned voice, which turns chatty, then incisive, over the bouncy rhythm of French Drop. During Ideas, his subtle country inflection is twisted into a hard, demanding howl.

Such shades of light and dark are inherent in Adams’s renowned lyricism too. He turns the domestic into the intense and profound on I Need Your Mind and Black Cloud, before turning his world-weary gaze on the political for Togetherness, which is both a perfect pop song and thought-provoking attack on racism. But it’s Adams’s everyman quality that’s most endearing. Quick with a funny story, joke or witty aside, he encourages the crowd to make up for the absence of a lead guitar solo by whooping through Tears of Happiness, then abandons the microphone and unplugs his guitar for a campfire-like rendition of How We Get Through. By the end of the 55-minute set, Adams is standing atop a bar opposite the stage, playing his guitar with a fringed lampshade hanging over his brow, the nervous troubadour replaced not by a cocky bastard but a charming, insightful entertainer.

• Steven James Adams is at the Hope & Ruin, Brighton on 12 March. Box office: 01273 325793.Then touring.