This isn’t where to come for reinvention of any Spanish wheels: it’s a fleecy comfort blanket of familiar dishes.

My brother lives on the Isle of Bute, a couple of hours from Glasgow in terms of distance, but a lifetime away when it comes to agate-hued hills and glittering pewter sea. One time, he organised a big party for my mother’s birthday and employed a team of fancy caterers to whisk up all sorts of elaborate salads and canapes. Party guests were suitably wowed, but me, I didn’t touch a single pomegranate-jewelled or wasabi-mayo’d mouthful. That’s because I was out back, where a neighbour had delivered a galvanised dustbin brimming with treasure: fat, sweet langoustines. It was as if he’d simply dredged the bin through the Firth of Clyde and come up with a snapping, wriggling host of the things, then plunged them, bin and all, into boiling sea water. It was a long time since I’d tasted anything as wonderful. I missed most of the celebrations while working my way down the binful, fingers shredding on what anywhere else in the country would cost hundreds of quid, sucking on shells, utterly blissed out on Scotland’s beauty and bounty.

It’s long been a source of dismay to foodie Scots that much of our seafood is exported to the likes of Spain without so much as a quick hoots to the homeland. Fifteen years ago in the Hollywood Hills, then record producer Stephen Lironi (also ex-Altered Images and still Mr Clare Grogan) was reading an article in this very paper, bemoaning that there was no local market for Scotland’s more esoteric shellfish and seafood. The article struck a chord. Today, with a successful tapas joint under his sherry-fuelled belt (Bar Esteban), he has determined to intercept at least a portion of it to serve at his latest baby, Escocesa.

Which is why I’m hurtling up here where the tubelines don’t go. Memories of that galvanised bin, memories of I Could Be Happy (a potent combination for this particular expat). The place looks fantastic: bar stools fringe an open kitchen at the front, all the better to ogle bustling chefs and sparkling seafood on ice – scallops, silvery sardines, tuna to be served “a la Bilbaina” with tomatoes, garlic and sherry, and, yes, langoustines; and at the back – yippee! – a bookable, sit-down restaurant, its quirky 50s furnishing given a Lynchian air by the light from a vast neon sign reading Dream Baby Dream.

Warm, spiced chickpeas arrive as a gift while we check out the menu: nice touch. This isn’t where to come for reinvention of any Spanish wheels: it’s a fleecy comfort blanket of familiar dishes – croquetas, patatas bravas, tortilla, boards of fine, silky lomo, chorizo and pepper-studded salsichon served with crisp little picos de pan. Chipirones (baby squid) in a light, lacy and pleasingly salty batter are the perfect accompaniment to our carafe of Catalunyan Terraprima, shimmering with riesling and xarel-lo (cava) grapes, from a predominantly Spanish list.

That tortilla is a model of its kind, a stout number, perfectly baveuse in the centre (not weepy and gloopy, as is the current fashion) and rich with caramelised onions: glorious. Quail from the specials board comes with chunks of carrot and caramelised oranges – the scent of fine sherry imbues many of the dishes. I don’t love the bread, it’s a little wan and dull, and I’m not convinced by artichokes with (good) aïoli – they taste as though they’ve been warmed straight from the jar. I guess I was expecting something fried or chargrilled, as they’ve done with the smoky sardines, the meaty, insistent flesh needing nothing more than a spritz of lemon. And those langoustines? Just toasty from their grilling, glugged with good oil, they are everything I was pining for. These alone make the trip worthwhile. We order a second plate immediately.

Some fine Scottish seafood, in a Spanish restaurant, in Stokey. Works for me. Truth is, after three days on beautiful Bute, I start fidgeting. I’ve the short attention span of the urbanite. I’ve thrilled to the Say Aye To A Pie sign in the local baker’s, and bought the DayGlo rhubarb pies as instructed, and eaten the Zavaroni’s ice-cream. Enough already: get me back to all the restaurants. But I’ll never tire of the seafood. And those langoustines at Escocesa, well, they may not be served so insouciantly, but for sweetness and freshness and all-round loveliness, they come pretty damned close.

• Escocesa 67 Stoke Newington Church Street, London N16, 020-7812 9189. Open all week, Mon-Fri 5-10pm (11pm Fri), 11am-11pm Sat, 11am-9.30pm Sun. About £30 a head, plus drinks and service.

Food 7/10 Atmosphere 8/10 Value for money 7/10