Lose weight, gain it back, join a gym and lose it again. Forget it – everyone gains weight in the winter, and other thoughts to ruminate on in 2016

Text that guy back after four gin and tonics. You got this.

Eat at least one meal not at Starbucks every day.

Get Donald Trump to block me on two social media platforms. 

Only eat Taco Bell when drunk and someone else drives me.

Talk about how expensive it is to join a gym.

Drink eight glasses of water a week.

Google what a leek is. Do nothing about it. 

Consider therapy but then remember how much it actually costs. Instead, spend that money to fix my car’s suspension.

Accept that meditating would be good for me, but that I just don’t have the time and crying to the Original Broadway Recording of West Side Story works about as well.

Be even warier of institutions. 

Talk myself out of getting a dog. 

Talk myself out of getting a bearded dragon.

Talk myself out of getting bangs. 

Get a favorite brand of boxed wine.

Entertain the idea of entering into a loving relationship. Watch The Parent Trap (1998) instead.

Buy even more pairs of moisture-wicking leggings like I’m using them to work out.

Never split an appetizer. 

Live life to like the 3/4ths. That’s still a lot. 

Look into taking a trip to South America. Get as far as looking at photos of carnival. 

Find even more ways to avoid wearing a bra. 

Keep at least four opinions to myself.

Use up all my flirtatious energy on Trader Joe’s cashiers. 

Appreciate tortellini more.

Cut down on the number of breakfast sandwiches for dinner when compared with 2015.

Read a lot of books. Neglect to mention to people that they’re mostly romance novels.

Text that guy back totally sober on a Sunday sometime after reading one too many inspirational quotes that were meant to inspire fitness. Not sure why.

Open myself up to the possibility that Tame Impala is a real band and not just an elaborate prank my friends are playing on me. 

Accept that turtlenecks are fashionable. 

Fixate on Tom Cruise’s teeth not being centered on his face. 

Never join in when someone suggests we do a “jumping” photo. 

Don’t drink any tea.

Start a blog. You don’t have to be a parent to be a mommy blogger.

Wrestle with my mortality. 

Stop referring to my landlord as “my husband” in conversation.

Save money by not going to any music festivals; pretend that’s enough of a fiscal plan.

Make things about me.

Don’t get in any fistfights. 

Use the word portend in a sentence. 

Be more active (on Instagram). 

Finally learn to say no when people ask me to babysit; I am a goddamned adult with a job. I can quit.

Figure out if my hair looks better up or down.

Get a signature scent that isn’t just “I spilled coffee on myself.”

Disappoint my father. 

Get exhausted by the sheer thought of skiing. 

Save money. Blow it on a roomba. 

Lose weight. Gain it back. Gain more. Lose some weight. Gain it back. Gain even more. Yeah, more than the last time. What am I saving this body for? Lose some weight. OK, everyone gains weight in the winter.

Vote. 

Keep to surface-level topics with my grandma so I can still love her.

Download an app to learn a new language. 

Actually get to the end of an article that isn’t a list. 