Last bites: Mum’s Chinese food and a hearty British pud await the co-founder of Bao restaurant

The Golden Crown was my parents’ first restaurant, in Nottingham, and I’d want to have my last meal there. The Chinese name of the restaurant was Fu Shing, after Cantonese pop star Kwok Fu Shing, one of the four 1990s Hong Kong superstars, collectively known as the four heavenly kings. Fu Shin – or Aaron Kwok as he’s known in English – was my mum’s favourite. She probably still listens to them all.

We lived above the restaurant when I was aged about seven to nine. It was really old-school, badly decorated with half the wall painted pink, the top half sponged blue. At the front there was a mock Chinese roof, green tiles, inside, on the bar.

I’d want to eat at the back around the big communal table, with the lazy susan in the middle, just like we used to. All the chefs and the staff would be with us, and there’d be karaoke playing. My Chinese name (given to me by a fortune teller for good luck) is Shing Ling – we were all given Chinese names by a fortune teller, for good luck. At karaoke, I’d always sing this one song – Yesterday Once More by the Carpenters – because of the lyrics: “every shing-a-ling-a-ling that they’re starting to sing …”.

It would be autumn, my favourite part of the year – I love the changing of the seasons, the leaves falling, the crisp air. It would be an early evening meal, with my close friends and family. We have big family gatherings all the time, for birthdays, for Chinese New Year, at Christmas – but it’s usually fairly quiet. We’d play cards, that sort of thing.

I would start with oysters – served with a mignonette sauce. I really like vinegary foods. And that would be followed by Shanghai dumplings, Beijing dumplings and pan-fried dumplings, they’d just keep coming from the kitchen – I love them all. Dumplings in general are my favourite thing, they make me so happy. I’d want a dumpling master to make them, because they’re really tricky to get right. My brother Shing’s maths teacher was also an excellent dumpling chef, and he first made me Beijing dumplings. Then I discovered Shanghai dumplings – with the soup inside – when Shin and I went to China. My favourite pan-fried dumplings are from Din Tai Fung – I don’t know how they get the pastry skins so thin, perfectly crispy.

Otherwise, it would mostly be my mum cooking. She’s really creative – she still surprises me with certain things she produces, like making black garlic by putting garlic in a rice cooker for three days. She picks up a lot of tips and she’s always trying out new things. I would want her to cook her lobster with ginger and spring onions on crispy noodles.

There’d also be some lamb skewers in xinjiang spice and the home-style cabbage from Silk Road – a really simple cabbage cooked in soy and garlic, it’s ever so sweet, so tasty. I’d also want their cold tripe dish: the spices and seasoning they use, it’s the perfect mix of saltiness, spice and sugar with Sechuan chilli … Silk Road is up there as one of my favourite restaurants.

We’d have chishang rice – Taiwanese short-grain plump rice, it’s such a great rice, you can feel each grain individually. With rice it’s mostly about texture. And we’d have Chinese roast duck with soy sauce, soaking into the rice.

To drink, we’d have a bottle of Manzanilla sherry – it would cut beautifully through the richness of the food. Sherry is so often associated with old grannies as something really sweet, but I love the dryness of it.

And, for dessert, I’d want something really comforting: an apple crumble with custard. I grew up in England. My tastes are shaped by both cultures.