The Bridge actress talks about her brother’s death in a car accident and how her mother got together with her best friend’s dad after her parents’ divorce

My dad was the 10th of 11 children. My mother has three brothers. My dad was a salesman, my mum was a school nurse. Tragedy struck the family when I was 10 days old. My eldest brother was killed in a car accident. He was six. My grandmother survived the incident, but the loss devastated my parents. I think they went into shock for a couple of years.

That loss shaped me as a person. I grew up with the feeling that something really horrible had happened. Now that I am a parent I know that we all want our children to grow up in the best of circumstances and to have the safest and best childhood that they can. I can only imagine how hard it was for my parents to get through those years.

Mum and Dad divorced when I was four, so then Mum, my elder brother and I lived together. I still saw my dad regularly as he lived only a bus ride away, so I’d see him every other weekend and in school holidays.

My best friend at school – we used to go for sleepovers – was also from a divorced family. Her father was also on his own and we would sometimes say to each other, how wonderful it would be if our parents got together. They did, so I was very lucky. I got on really well with my stepsister. I was close to my brother, who is three years older than me, but we would fight now and again, just like normal brothers and sisters do.

I never met my father’s father; his mother died when I was only one. On my mother’s side, my grandfather died before I knew him and my grandmother developed Alzheimer’s so they weren’t a huge part of my life. But when my mother remarried, I got a step-grandmother, which was lovely.

With so many uncles and aunts on my father’s side, our family has always seemed quite big. I would catch up with my father’s relatives during summer holidays with him in Överkalix, in northern Sweden.

My parents taught me broad Christian values. To be kind to one another, to be honest, not to just think about yourself. As my parents came from the northern part of Sweden, where there was a strong religious influence, I feel my morals are based on these principles even though my parents weren’t religious themselves.

I always knew I wanted to have children of my own. I met my husband Daniel when I was 23; we were married when I was pregnant with my first child, Ossian. We’ve had our ups and downs like every couple, especially when we were younger.

It is hard to figure what I am trying to teach them. I am aware that as a parent I give conflicting messages

My husband is a priest in the church but my children aren’t that interested in faith at the moment. It is something they can decide about themselves when they are older. We split the parenting – when I am away filming, he does more and when I am back, I can do more.

As the children are just 12 and six, it is hard to figure what I am trying to teach them. I am aware that as a parent I give conflicting messages – I tell them not to try too hard, that if they focus on having an open heart and have close relationships, everything will sort itself out for itself … But then I push myself very hard. I find myself quite complex as a parent.

Family is absolutely everything to me. I love being an aunt and I am a godparent to three children (two are relatives’ children, one a friend’s) too. Being a mother is fulfilling and exhausting – but it is the most rewarding role of all.

• The Bridge Season 3 and trilogy boxset, starring Sofia Helin, are out on DVD and Blu-ray