Feasting: New year’s resolutions are so last year ... and the year before. Choose simply to feed yourself well in 2016: treat your kitchen like a blank canvas and introduce fresh flavours into the mix, starting with this fragrant Balinese feast ...

This time of year presents a culinary conundrum. The thought of cooking anything fills you with lethargy, yet your newly enlarged belly makes you feel strangely hungry.

Chances are that you have been eating the same thing for days on end – leftover mince pies, chocolate, turkey-and-stuffing sandwiches. The only way to jolt yourself out of this funk is to change the scene completely.

Instead of going all clean and lean (New Year’s resolutions are so last year, and the year before, and the year before…) I would suggest giving your cooking a jump-start by doing something totally different. So this week’s recipe comes from the other side of the world.

Despite the omnipresence of nasi goreng (fried rice), Indonesia’s 18,000 islands have a rich and varied cuisine. From the warm, turmeric-laden, jackfruit curries that you can buy on the streets of Jakarta to the charcoal grilled fish of Sulewesi dressed with hot sauce, there is something for all palates.

Today’s dishes hail from Bali. They have the freshness of chilli, fresh coriander, crispy apple and lime, but with enough warmth from the ginger, coconut and turmeric to cosset you into the new year.

As is generally the case with Indonesian cuisine, they take a bit of time, and concentration, to prepare. Time to be thinking about which new year’s resolution to break first.

This is normally served with plain rice but a wild rice mix or black venere rice would make a great accompaniment.

Serves 62cm piece ginger, gratedZest of 1 lemon2 garlic cloves, crushed2 red chillies, finely chopped1 tsp turmeric (or 2cm piece fresh turmeric, peeled and grated)2 tbsp coriander stalks, chopped1 bunch spring onions, chopped50g creamed coconut block, grated6 chicken breasts (or 10-12 chicken thighs)1 tbsp rapeseed oil 300ml good chicken stockCoriander leaves, picked, to serve

1 Put all the ingredients from the ginger to the coconut in a food processor or blender. Blitz to a paste.

2 Stuff the chicken breasts with the paste, retaining 1 tbsp of it back. Prise a small amount of the skin away from the flesh to create a pocket under the skin. Stuff a little of the paste under the skin. Rub any paste left on your hands into the chicken.

3 Preheat the grill. Heat the oil in a large shallow frying pan. Put the chicken breasts in the pan skin-side up and cook over a medium heat for about 5 minutes. Put the pan under the grill for about 4-5 minutes. If the chicken skin starts to brown too quickly, turn the grill down to low and keep checking that the skin is browning nicely.

4 Whisk the reserved paste into the chicken stock. Remove the chicken from the grill and pour in the stock. Cook over a low heat until the chicken is firm to touch. Sprinkle with coriander leaves.

Coconut and eastern spices combine with stalwarts of the British kitchen – mince and winter veg – in this Balinese hot salad.

For the paste2 red chillies4 small shallots2 garlic clovesA large pinch each of white pepper and nutmeg4 skinless almonds2 tsp sesame seeds2cm cube galangal, grated2 tsp shrimp paste1 tsp ground coriander

For the rest50g desiccated coconut 1 tbsp rice bran oil or unflavoured vegetable oil100g pork or chicken mince2 tsp palm sugar 100g savoy cabbage, shredded100g kale, shredded100g beansproutsJuice of 1 lime

1 Make the paste by blending the nine paste ingredients together.

2 Cover the coconut with boiling water and leave for 15 minutes. Squeeze out any excess water.

3 Heat the oil in a large frying pan and fry the spice paste with the meat mince and coconut. Sprinkle with palm sugar and cook for about 15 minutes, stirring occasionally over a medium heat.

4 Blanch the cabbage and kale in boiling salted water for a minute. Drain well.

5 Toss the cabbage, kale and beansprouts with the spiced pork mix. Finish with lime juice to taste.

Juice of 2 limes2 tsp palm sugar2 tsp fish sauce2 hot red chillies, finely sliced½ red onion, sliced2 green apples, cored and cut into thin matchsticks½ cucumber peeled, deseeded, cut in half lengthways and thinly sliced 4 tbsp peanuts, roasted and crushed

1 Mix the first four ingredients together to make the dressing.

2 Prep the apple, cucumber and onion and toss together. Drizzle with the dressing and top with the peanuts.