The odes Keats wrote in his last creative surge are so wonderful that it is impossible to believe the dreadful truth: he was just a boy, soon to be dead from a disease that can now be cured in a trice with antibiotics

What the bloggers do today, the journalists will do tomorrow, so it’s no surprise to see even the best newspapers – except, of course, this one – scrambling their punctuation. Social justice warriors tend to get it all wrong about punctuation, which is not an apparatus of elitist repression, but a system of information, at the disposal of all. There can be no reliable clarity without it. The great Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa, who was a social rebel in almost every way, was firmly conservative on the subject. “To have touched the feet of Christ,” he said, “is no excuse for mistakes in punctuation.”

Half a dozen people I know, including me, got the magnificent new two-volume edition of TS Eliot’s poetry for a Christmas present. The editors have at last corrected printers’ errors that have bedevilled Eliot’s poems for decades. Reading the editorial notes is almost as enthralling as reading the old man’s besottedly erotic poems for his young second wife, Valerie. He was so unashamedly delighted to have got himself into the category of Old Goat.

Keats never made it, except, perhaps, with the owner of the ripening breast on which he pillows his head in his famous poem Bright Star. But when, in another poem, he writes about “the trophies of my lovers gone”, the poignancy rather depends on our knowledge that the lovers gone were women he would never meet. Yet the odes he wrote in his last creative surge are so wonderful that it is impossible to believe the dreadful truth: he was just a boy, soon to be dead from a disease that can now be cured in a trice with antibiotics.

In the days when I could still travel, I always thought of Keats when I gazed up at his window from the Spanish Steps in Rome. Yesterday at the hospital, comfortably lounging while my immune system underwent one of its regular replacements, I thought again of how easily his marvellous gift could have been saved. All he had to do was be born a century and a half later.

The festive season stirred my charitable feelings, but when some voice on TV told me to adopt a snow leopard, I made the mistake of reading up on the threatened beast and concluded that it might not be all that threatened after all. The apparent reluctance of the snow leopard to cooperate in the process of becoming an extinct species reminded me of the best Al Gore joke (“In the year Al Gore was born there were 7,000 polar bears and now there are only 30,000 left”). It seems that a snow leopard can kill and eat between 30 and 40 blue sheep per annum. I think I’ll adopt a blue sheep.