When Viv Groskop’s grandmother died, she inherited her grandparents’ things. She couldn’t bring herself to throw them away but how could she keep them all?

What do you do with other people’s old stuff? The answer, according to me, is sit on it for 10 years until you realise you are deeply in denial. For good or bad, my problem has had a fairly manageable physical dimension: a pile of my grandparents’ stuff left behind after my grandma died in 2006. The size of it was not massive and this in itself was an issue. It meant I didn’t really have to deal with it. It wasn’t like I’d had to rent storage space. It occupied a corner of the loft in boxes and plastic bags. Even the bags belonged to my grandmother. Because there was nothing I wanted to throw out or reorganise, especially not a 90s Boots carrier bag. But it was still stuff that was going to have to go at some point. But when? And how?

My grandparents were not hoarders. When my grandad, Ivor, died in 2001, my grandma got rid of many things to ease the burden on us when she died. There was a shed full of newspapers dating back decades, including copies of every newspaper I’d ever had an article in. They all went in the recycling and quite right, too. So before my grandma, Vera, died, aged 84, she had pared it all back to the bone. All that was left was the “important” stuff: paperwork, photos, scrapbooks, documents, passports, birth certificates, and recipe cards that had stood the test of time.

It was hardly an archive. It was a collection of odds and sods that would mean nothing to anyone. And yet these scrappy things meant everything to me. I couldn’t bear to look at them, let alone figure out if I should get rid of them.

For a long time they posed no problem as they took up little space. Occasionally, I would think about them festering in the loft and realise that it wasn’t quite right. What was I keeping them for? My parents had handed them over when my grandma died. Or rather, I had snatched them all up. My parents didn’t want any of it. A wise decision. They are people who believe it’s healthier to live in the present. I am more nostalgic and sentimental. And I love stories and memories. And all that stuff set off 1,000 stories in my head. Would I remember them all if I got rid of it all? What if I threw away something important and regretted it?

Yet whenever I watched a television show such as Britain’s Biggest Hoarders, the thought of my grandma’s faded, ragged makeup bag would cross my mind. I had it in the bottom of my wardrobe and occasionally got it out to smell it. Yes, I know this is vaguely unpleasant. But it did smell of her even a decade later and would transport me right back to a room with her in it.

The same with a pair of woollen gloves, all bobbled and itchy and looking like something from a Blue Peter jumble sale, which is probably where they originally came from. I didn’t wear them too often because I didn’t want them to take on my scent and not hers. When I got them out, though, I saw myself in Britain’s Biggest Hoarders off the telly. It wasn’t pretty.

Then, thankfully but horribly, fate intervened. We had to clear the loft to have a new room built. There would be no more storage space in the house. Where would I put the things now? In boxes under the bed? I thought they would haunt me there. Could I display them? Hardly. Most of it was rubbish, I suddenly realised. Photographs that had never been sorted, many of people I didn’t recognise. There was no one left to tell me who the people were. Why keep old photos of strangers? Time to wake up.

I sat on it all for another six months by piling it up next to the stairs. I began asking, who would notice if I got rid of this stuff? Who would mind? Not my parents, although I had started sorting through photographs I thought they would want to see one more time. My sister, it turned out, had specific things she wanted that we had never talked about: all my grandparents’ dancing medals and badges from the 50s. She had no idea I had kept them and was thrilled. My hoarding had served a purpose.

Who else would want things? I had aunts and uncles I could surprise with photographs. I started to sort those into piles.

Then came the really tricky stuff. How can I throw out my grandma’s passport? It’s not even a nice photo of her. But how could I put it in the bin? (I couldn’t. I still have it.) What about the recipe for prawn and cheese flan in my grandmother’s handwriting (one of the few examples of it I have left), written on the back of a 1979 newsletter for Heirloom Jewellery, the company she worked for? (“There are three reasons why a hostess will book an Heirloom Party with you. 1. She loves the jewellery and would like to acquire more. 2. She likes you. 3. She feels enthusiastic about giving a party and entertaining her friends.”) There is no way I can get rid of this document. “Top sales: Hazel Robinson in her first week – £377 – congratulations!”

And I just can’t chuck the recipe stuff. It is too intimate. My grandma did not like cooking much and these recipes are her failsafes. She cut out and kept these dog-eared newspaper cuttings in the 70s and hung on to them for 30 years. It is not for me to throw them out now, surely?

Other things are even more difficult to be ruthless about. What can I do with my grandad’s temperance certificate from the 20s? Does it mean enough to me to frame it? It meant nothing to my grandad (he definitely did not practise temperance once the certificate had been issued), but neither he nor my grandma would have wanted to throw out a certificate of any kind.

What does it all mean? There are strange things, preserved in ways that are difficult to understand. A small pristine silver photo frame still in its original box with a sticker on it that says, in my grandma’s handwriting, DOUBLE PHOTO FRAME. One side is empty. The other side has a picture of my grandparents on the beach in the late 1940s with my dad as a baby and his sister as a toddler.

Which is where we hit on the most difficult bit. And probably the reason I am struggling to sort through all this stuff in the first place. My grandparents lost their daughter, Linda, to meningitis three weeks before her third birthday in 1948.

Among the things I can’t put through the shredder is her death certificate and a document relating to her burial plot (which no one in my family has visited for more than half a century because my grandparents decided visiting the grave was stopping them from living their lives). Photographs were not popular in their house or in my parents’ house when I was growing up: to put up photographs would have meant deciding whether to put up a picture of Linda. No one wanted to make that choice. That is why the “DOUBLE PHOTO FRAME” has no second photo in it. Because it was never displayed.

Among these painful things, I found happy treasures. My grandad’s RAF pin, which is for my son, now. All my grandad’s boxing posters, dating back to 1937, with his name on them, assumed lost. (“Seats 1/- including tax. Ladies 6d. Standing 6d.”) The cigarette case my grandma gave her husband on their wedding day: “To Ivor from Vera. June 12th 1943.” The tie my grandad wore to my graduation. As the important and meaningful things surfaced, I realised that if I thought about it logically I probably could ditch the intricate notes about (really horrible) pork goulash and “main course vegetable soup.” But I didn’t have to ditch it all. I could put the special things in a box. And I could frame and give away other things to people to whom it would mean something. I could make it all manageable.

I won’t lie and say I’ve sorted it all yet. I can’t do it in one go. But I can see the end is in sight and I already feel lighter for it. A couple of bags have gone to charity, one with 20 pairs of gloves in that I never actually saw my grandma wear. I still have the makeup bag, a Bourjois Soir de Paris unopened powder compact and a scarf my grandma would have said should be worn at a jaunty angle.

I still have the Boots bag. Of course, I still have the Boots bag. It’s not a bit Britain’s Biggest Hoarders as long as you only have one. Is it?