Stella Grey is pestered by a man who is too interested in her underwear

Edward has now visited my profile four times. I know this as the visits are chalked up by the site. The fact that he’d looked four times made me want to look myself, attempting objective fresh eyes. What’s he seeing there? Did I do myself justice? Has something put him off so he has to return, to decide whether the positives outweigh the negatives? Or is it – as has happened to me, more than once – that there was a lightning bolt experience, an experience of recognition, and he’s excited and can’t resist revisiting?

The evidence, I’m afraid to say, points to the former. I replied enthusiastically to his suggestion that we meet, perhaps too enthusiastically (you see – online dating has filled me with self doubt). Since then there has been silence.

Writing a really good profile is difficult without being dull and generic or sounding as if you got a PR company to spin you in the best possible light (spin is always suspicious). When I review my old out-of-date spiels, I’m always horrified. Oh my God, I’ve been known to shout – making the dog look anxious – that’s terrible; you sound desperate, unhappy, self-aggrandising, prescriptive; you sound like one of those people with a wishlist, when the truth is you don’t have a wishlist, not beyond ordinary decency, a bright mind, something in the eyes, a general wry optimism and lack of cynicism, a sense of the absurd, a love of books and cinema, and – oh no, there it is; it’s happening again.

James (who loves his car and thinks our sparring is sexy) rang again, a few days later, just at the point at which I thought he’d given up. He said we should have the lunch. I said I didn’t think so. He asked what I was doing and I told him I was frying onions for a curry. I’d come over and join you, he said, but I’ve had half a bottle of wine. Really, I said – who had the other half? Ha ha, he said, no no, the other half is for tomorrow. It’s just me, just me in this big empty house that I’m going to have to put on the market.

I don’t think you should call me any more, I said. I’m not for you and you need to follow up other opportunities, and find someone you have things in common with. I’ve tried that, he said, but I can’t shake the feeling that we’d have great sex. No we wouldn’t, I insisted, you’re just projecting like mad, and if that’s a pick-up line, seriously, you need to stop. He rang off.

Later, he texted to ask what I was doing. I said I was reading on the sofa. He said he wished he was on the sofa with me because he could distract me from a book very rapidly. Maybe I don’t want to be distracted, I told him. Let’s have lunch and sex afterwards, he said. We’re middle aged and need to grab opportunities and live a little, what do you say? I said no thanks.

You need to be a yes person, he said. I’ll get you saying yes. You’ll be shouting it. À bientôt. I’ll call you.

My pants are not that scanty, I said. They are more like the navy blue ones we wore under our hockey skirts

At 11.30pm he rang again, sounding as if he’d drunk the other half of the bottle. I told him I’d prefer it if he didn’t call me any more; there was no point in our meeting. There’s something I want to do to you, he told me. Oh, I said wearily, what’s that? I want you to bend over the table, he continued, and I am going to run my hand up your thighs and up into your scanty little pants. They’re not actually that scanty, I told him, resolutely un-turned on. They’re actually more like the kind of navy blue knickers we used to wear under our hockey skirts.

The moment I’d said it I realised it was a mistake. He was off on his sports field scenario, and had to be talked down (though my sternness was also, apparently, sexy as hell). He texted as soon as I’d rung off to say he was hard. I texted back to say I didn’t want to talk to him any more, because we weren’t right for one another, and it wouldn’t work. He told me I was a bitch like all the other bitches. So that was nice.

I went back and looked at Edward’s profile. I’ve copied it on to the desktop, so the site doesn’t chalk up an embarrassing number of visits.

Hello, Edward, I said aloud, feeling suddenly hopeful again.

Stella Grey is a pseudonym

@GreyStellaGrey