Readers’ favourite photographs, songs and recipes

My 18-month-old granddaughter, Evie, was feeling a bit left out when Uncle Alex (known to Evie as Bubble, as he buys and blows bubbles for her), was tickling Benson’s tummy.

Alex is my youngest son and Benson belongs to his girlfriend, Gem, and is a lovely, gentle rescue dog – a staffie and border collie cross. Evie decided she wanted a tummy rub, too, and adopted the same pose as Benson – lying on her back with legs and arms in the air to indicate that it was her turn.

Benson just turned on his side as the photograph was taken, slightly changing his pose.

Alex had to multitask the tickling and Evie was soon laughing hysterically at being tickled as well as the dog.

Evie and Benson respect each other and get on just fine. He never invades her space and neither does she his. A perfect relationship.

The snapshot makes me smile so much as Evie is so happy in it, and so are Benson and Alex!

Anne Sharman

Lonely this Christmas by Mud

“It’ll be lonely this Christmas/ Without you to hold / It’ll be lonely this Christmas / Lonely and cold”

 

Every Christmas dinner, Mum used to joke: “Do you remember that Christmas you spent in your room with the light off, playing that record over and over again? What was that all about?” Because she was Mum, neither I nor my brother felt we could tell her.

At first, I had just registered the girl’s presence on the bus. Then I noticed her name in the hood of her school raincoat. Soon, I was constantly repeating her name in my head.

My big brother was having a party. I was too shy to invite the girl from the bus, but knew where she got off, so found her number in the phonebook. I held my breath as my kind brother rang her house, pretending to be me. Her mum picked up. My brother explained that “he” knew her daughter from the bus and wanted to invite her to the party. Her mum promised that either she or her daughter would ring me back. Wow. The girl I was in love with even had a lovely mum.

Shortly afterwards, our phone rang. Nervous, I picked up. It was her. She didn’t want to come to the party. I put on a brave voice and said: “OK.”

Mud considered their 1974 Christmas No 1 a parody of the heartaches of the newly dumped. But I heard only painful truths in each line and bought the single.

So it was lonely that Christmas. Eventually, though, the girl and I became sixth formers and began chatting on the bus. Once, she even invited me to her house. As we drank tea together, I realised my heart no longer ached.

 Long after Mud’s heyday, I saw them perform live. As they built up to their finale at Dunstable Civic Hall, their biggest hit was noticeable by its absence. From my front row seat I shouted to Les Gray, “Lonely This Christmas!”

“We can’t. It’s summer,” he replied, though in a kind voice that I know meant, “But I can tell you’ve truly lived the lyrics, mate.”

Mum died four Christmases ago. Every Christmas dinner since, my brother has made my teenage children laugh by perfectly mimicking Granny teasing me about the Christmas I spent wearing out that record.

Danny Dice

Ingredients

2 sticks of celery finely chopped2 large carrots diced small4 chestnut mushrooms sliced thinly250g cooked turkey or chicken leftovers1 litre chicken stock1 teaspoon mild curry powderKnob of butterSeasoning to tasteServes 2-3

Melt the butter and fry the celery and carrots until softened. Add the mushrooms, turkey and curry powder and stir for a few minutes before adding the stock. At this stage, leftover stuffing and cranberry sauce can be added for extra flavour and richness. Bring to the boil and then reduce to a simmer for 20-30 minutes. Adjust seasoning and liquidise to required thickness.

This is a firm favourite with the family, except for one memorable year.

I’d bought the turkey on Christmas Eve – a nice fresh one, so I thought, from the supermarket. The next day, as I plonked the turkey on the worktop, I noticed a definite pong. Cutting the bag open, I could see that one of the legs was a greenish, yellowish hue. Help! It was Christmas morning and I had my father-in-law, mother, brother and our family of four expecting a turkey meal. Father-in-law had offered to pay for the turkey and had high expectations of Christmas dinner with all the trimmings.

But I couldn’t risk giving them food poisoning, so I grabbed the turkey, opened the back door and threw it in the dustbin, watched by my bemused younger daughter.

As the turkey plummeted, so did my spirits. What was I going to do? I had a small Quorn joint in the freezer that was the only thing resembling turkey. There was no time to think as the family were assembling at the front door, coated and booted, ready for the walk to church.

We linked up with the neighbours, exchanging pleasantries, me with a fixed smile. With adults and children strung out along the road, I heard our younger daughter shout above the chatter: “Guess what, Mum’s chucked the turkey in the dustbin.”

Faces turned. No time to stammer more than, “It’s off,” before we were being greeted warmly by the vicar. Forget water into wine, I needed a straight Quorn to turkey miracle.

At home, I got the Quorn out of the freezer and set to work. My husband and daughters were sworn to secrecy.

When they arrived, father-in-law, in his usual ebullient manner, offered to carve and mother wanted to know if she could help. “Give them extra large sherries, I hissed to my husband, and don’t let them near the kitchen.”

At one o’clock, a tap on the back door revealed a guardian angel in the form of my dear next-door neighbour, holding a covered plate of turkey slices.

“Hope this will help,” she winked. It certainly did.

There was enough turkey for the men. My mother and the rest of us would have Quorn. Let’s face it, mum’s tastebuds were shot and her sight was failing. As we settled down to eat, my mother was heard to chirrup. “Best turkey I’ve had in years!”

Bridget Hall