Readers’ recipe swap:  Your ideas for sparkly smoothies, zingy blueberry cakes and a kaleidoscopic beetroot tart channel sunnier climes with bright colours and exotic piquancy.

December brings a deluge of rich, indulgent and predominantly beige food. Granted, there’s the odd carrot stick here or there, and cranberry sauce with pretty much everything, but really, pastry and roast potatoes are the backbone of every meal. I know I am far from alone in longing for a bit of vibrancy and texture come the new year, and this week’s readers’ recipes have just that: the perfect balance of bold colour and flavour, but not so virtuous as to cause a terrible shock to the system. You can save that for the first full week back at work.

Angela Kim’s tropical sunshine smoothie is the perfect pick-me-up for a grey January morningMango and passion fruit bring the sweetness, while oats and cashews bulk it out so you’re not left hungry after half an hour., while detoutcoeurLimousin’s beetroot tarte tatin makes for an elegant lunch – the zing of the mint and zest of the orange providing a refreshing contrast to the earthy root. And MizPepperpot’s citrus cake comes with a bright blueberry rippled icing that takes little to no effort to make; watch the marshmallows melt to make sure they aren’t overcooked, and you will be using this clever shortcut on a regular basis.

Fadime Tiskaya’s rhubarb and hibiscus sorbet is utterly beautiful, in both looks and flavour; the addition of pink peppercorns adds extra interest, and balances out the sweetness of the fruit.Iif you’ve got people coming round but want to rein in the indulgence, this will do it. If, however, you are eschewing tradition and continuing the party into 2016, look no further than Marmaduke Scarlet’s jalebi. Rich, fragrant and crisp, these will look especially pretty if you divide the mix and use a few different food colourings. My good intentions were derailed my good intentions at the first bite.

The winning dish, which fitted the “vivid” brief in every sense, was Bobby Ananta’s umami rice, a one-pot wonder that judiciously balances comfort and freshness in an explosion of hues and textures. A recipe to ease you into January like no other.

My mother did Pendhak Pisan (a celebration of someone’s life a year on from their death) last Saturday to commemorate my father. In Javanese tradition, food is always part of this occasion; when my sister sent me a picture of the parasols that she was going to give to the guests, it was so colourful. She said: “our Dad had a colourful life, and this is how we should remember him”. So here’s my recipe to remember him, vivid and colourful.Bobby Ananta, Leicester

Serves 6500g boneless and skinless chicken thigh, diced 1.1 litres boiling water3 spring onions, thinly sliced 1 lemongrass stalk, bashed3 makrut lime leaves3 bay leaves 2 celery sticks, thinly sliced 560g jasmine rice, washed250ml coconut milkSalt, to taste Roasted peanuts, chopped, to serveCoriander leaves, chopped, to serveCrispy fried shallots, to serve

 For the paste 2 garlic cloves, finely chopped 2cm ginger, finely chopped 4cm fresh turmeric, finely chopped 2 tsp coriander seeds

 For the pickle 1 cucumber, seeds removed, cut into 5mm dice

Seeds from 1 pomegranate10 radishes, finely sliced 1 tbsp rice wine vinegar1 tbsp sugar 2cm ginger, finely choppedJuice from 1 lime

1 Preheat the oven to 170C/340F/gas mark 3½. Pound together all the paste ingredients in a pestle and mortar, or blitz in a food processor, until smooth then set aside.

2 Put the chicken and 900ml of the water in a lidded casserole dish, then add the spring onions, lemongrass, makrut lime leaves, bay leaves and celery. Bring to the boil, then simmer for 10 minutes. Add the paste and the rest of the water, stir well and simmer for another 10 minutes.

3 Finally, add the rice and coconut milk, season with salt, stir well and cook for another 5 minutes. Then put in the oven for 35-40 minutes.

4 Meanwhile, make the pickle. In a large bowl, mix all the pickle ingredients together. Set aside until the rice is cooked.

5 Serve with a handful of toasted peanuts, chopped coriander leaves, fried shallots and the pickles.

Soaked oats and cashews are blended here with tropical fruits and a hint of turmeric, giving this breakfast-in-a-glass an extra nutritional kick. Angela Kim, via GuardianWitness

Serves 250g rolled oats2 tbsp cashews½ large banana½ mangoPulp of ½ passion fruit 2 dates½-1 tsp ground turmeric500ml milk of your choice3 ice cubes

1 Soak the oats and cashews overnight, with just enough water to cover. Slice the bananas and freeze.

2 In the morning, drain the cashews and oats, then rinse quickly. Add to the blender with rest of the ingredients. Blend until smooth, then serve.

My daughter did extremely well at school today, so I baked her this lovely, moist cake using her favourite ingredients. It’s best served warm while the topping is still gooey. Blueberries go so well with citrus flavours, and their sharpness compliments the sweetness of the cake and marshmallow.MizPepperpot, via GuardianWitness

Serves 8225g self-raising flour1 tsp baking powder150g caster sugar175g softened butter3 medium eggsJuice and zest of 1 large orangeZest from 2 limes

 For the topping100g white marshmallows 125g fresh or frozen blueberries

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Grease and line a 21cm cake tin.

2 Put all the cake ingredients in a mixing bowl, then with a hand mixer, beat together until well combined. Pour into the tin and bake until golden and firm to the touch – around 45-55 minutes. When cooked, allow to cool slightly, then remove from the tin and put on a cake stand or plate.

3 Put the marshmallows and 100g of the blueberries into a microwaveable dish. If you’re using giant-sized marshmallows, microwave on the high setting for about 50 seconds to 1 minute and less if using smaller marshmallows. Stop cooking as soon as the marshmallows balloon up and the blueberries begin to burst. Keep an eye on this process, as if they are cooked for too long, the mix will be tough and chewy.

4 Give the mix a little stir to blend in the blueberries. Spread over the warm cake and top with the remaining 25g of blueberries, then serve immediately.

In my beetroot tarte tatin the beetroot is caramelised with sugar and vinegar, to bring out their natural, earthy sweetness. The creamy goats cheese, added after the tatin is baked, makes a perfect addition. Caramelising the orange before juicing for the chermoula adds a bitter, deep sweetness to the sauce.detoutcoeurLimousin, via GuardianWitness

Serves 41 tbsp butter2 tbsp red wine vinegar1 tbsp sugar500g beetroot, peeled and cut into small wedgesSalt and ground black pepper1 ready-rolled sheet puff pastry75g goat’s cheese

 For the caramelised orange and mint chermoula1 orange, halved2 garlic cloves, chopped1 small bunch mint1 tsp ground cumin 2 tbsp red wine vinegar½ tsp sea salt1 fresh chilli, roughly chopped

1 To make the chermoula, heat a frying pan before adding the halved orange, flesh-side down. Fry for a few minutes until it starts to caramelise. Remove from the heat. Add the juice from the orange and all the other ingredients to a food processor and whizz up until well blended.

2 Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Add the butter, vinegar and sugar to a 20cm ovenproof frying pan/baking tin followed by the beetroot wedges, salt and pepper. Roast for about 20-30 minutes, or until the beetroot is starting to soften.

3 Remove the beetroot from the oven, then rearrange and pack the beetroot as neatly as possible in the tin before covering with a circle of pastry big enough to cover the contents of the tin, tucking it into the sides. Return this to the oven and bake for 15‑20 minutes, or until the pastry is puffed and golden.

4 Remove from the oven and leave for 10 minutes before turning out on to a serving plate.

5 Crumble the goat’s cheese over the top and sprinkle a few tablespoons of the chermoula over the tatin. Serve at room temperature.

I made Indian jalebi for Diwali a few years ago, a sticky sweet that may have had its origins in medieval Persia. Deep-fried “whirls” of coloured batter, are soaked in a tart and sweet sugar syrup, and are very popular at parties and celebrations throughout the year.Marmaduke Scarlet, via GuardianWitness

Makes about 18-20190g plain flour1 tbsp gram (chickpea) flour1½ tsp baking powder2 tbsp sugar2 tsp lemon juice1 tsp ghee, melted (or clarified butter)250ml water (for batter)2 tsp beetroot powder or 4 drops natural food dye (yellow, red, orange or pink colouring works well)Light vegetable oil, for deep frying

 For the sugar syrup340g sugar250ml water½ tsp ground cardamom and ground cinnamon, or mixed spice1 tbsp fresh lemon or lime juice

1 Sift the plain flour, gram flour and baking powder into a bowl, then combine with the sugar and lemon juice. Stir in the melted ghee and food colouring. Add a little water to form a thick, but smooth batter. It should be like very thick double cream.

2 Make the sugar syrup by heating together the sugar, water, spices and lemon or lime juice until the sugar has dissolved, stirring occasionally. Simmer until the syrup begins to slightly thicken; this may take about 10 minutes. Keep warm while you prepare the jalebi.

3 Heat the oil in a large heavy-based saucepan or deep-fat fryer, until a breadcrumb sizzless and turns golden in around 30 seconds, then fill a piping bag with the batter.

4 Squeeze the piping bag over the hot oil in a swirling spiral or coil shape. Don’t worry if you can’t get perfect concentric circles or even a neat shape, as this takes some practice. No matter how untidy your shape is, it still tastes good and adds to its charm! Deep fry until crisp and lightly coloured, flipping them over once to ensure that they evenly cook, around 2 minutes on each side. Don’t overcrowd the oil; it will be necessary to cook these in batches.

5 Drain the jalebi on kitchen paper to remove any excess oil, then dip them in the warm sugar syrup, turning once. Let them sit in the syrup for about 1 minute. These are best served slightly warm. Although they will stay fresh in an airtight container for about 4 days.

This tastes as exciting as it looks: sharp, sweet, spicy and just wonderful.Fadime Tiskaya, via GuardianWitness

Serves 6For the sorbet220ml water4 tbsp dried hibiscus flowers¼ tsp pink peppercorns200g sugar450g forced pink rhubarb, chopped20g fresh ginger, peeled and slicedJuice of half a lime

 For the crystalised mintCaster sugar20 fresh mint leaves1 egg whiteJuice of half a clementine

1 Put the water, hibiscus and the peppercorns in a small pan and bring it to boil and let set aside until it is cool and the water is red and the flowers have released their flavour.

2 Sieve the juice into a big pan and discard the flowers and peppercorns. Add the sugar, rhubarb and ginger then bring it to a boil and simmer for about 20 minutes, until the rhubarb is completely cooked and falling apart. Allow to cool.

3 Pick about half of the ginger pieces out and discard it. With a hand blender, blend it until you have a smooth thick consistency. Mix in the lime juice, put it into a plastic container, chill then freeze for at least 5 hours, or overnight if possible.

4 For the crystallised mint, put some sugar in a shallow bowl. Mix the egg white with the clementine juoce, then dip the mint leaves into the egg white mixture and dip it in the sugar to coat completely on both sides. Put it on nonstick paper or a wire rack and leave it overnight to harden.

5 When ready to serve, chop the mint roughly, then scatter over the sorbet. D