Jane Perrone put six bird feeders into her garden to find out which one scored best

Back in November I set out to trial six bird feeders for our gardening podcast Sow, Grow, Repeat: which were attracted the most birds to my garden, were the most durable, and easy to fill and clean? Here’s my verdict on all six, plus my choice of best buy. You can listen to my update on the podcast here. 

Score: 2/5

Verdict: This is a budget option, and it shows: the lid doesn’t stay on in high winds and it wouldn’t last more than a season or two, but a good choice if you don’t have much to spend. 

It’s almost empty in the picture because it kept falling down and dropping its seed.Hard to keep clean with lots of nooks and crannies for damp to accumulate.

Buy: £2 from Wilkinsons.

Score: 3/5

Verdict: This is an interesting variation on the standard bird feeder that’s reasonably priced and proved popular with the birds (and the occasional slug!). 

One downside is it’s tricky to assemble, requiring very strong hands and a particular knack to remove the roof and slide in the jar of peanut butter. 

The attachments to the chain were hard to slot in, too, but they did stay in place once it was up, despite high winds.

Buy: £6 from Wilkinsons.

Score: 4/5

Verdict: This is a classic-looking, sturdy feeder that stood up well to winter storms: the lid stayed on throughout and the seed stayed dry despite heavy rains.

This feeder can accommodate a lot of birds on the four perches and is, as the name promises, easy to clean. The clear plastic is sturdier than on some cheaper models so it should not buckle or warp. 

The lack of a seed catcher meant some seed did fall to the ground. 

Buy: £18.99 from the RSPB.

Score: 5/5 JANE’S BEST BUY

Verdict: I love this feeder. It’s pretty easy to fill, sturdy, and the dish at the bottom keeps seed from falling on the ground. 

It feels solid enough to last for years but the price is reasonable, too. Just make sure you twist the lid on properly so it stays shut - and waterproof.

It’s easy enough to wash out and it looks good in the garden.

Buy: £16.99 from Peckish.

Score: 4/5

Verdict: This bird feeder is the Rolls Royce of this group: yes, it’s expensive to buy, but it’s very classy-looking and if you take care of it it should last for years and years. 

It’s the easiest of the six to fill, too: if I was buying one for myself I think I’d opt for the seed version, though, as the peanuts weren’t that popular with the birds in my garden. It’s also a cinch to clean.

Be warned: it is very heavy so will need a decent support. I hung mine from a metal bird feeder pole.

Buy: £59.95 from Haiths (comes with a 2kg bag of premium peanuts).

Score: 4/5

Verdict: This is a good solid feeder, but the peanuts didn’t prove that popular with the birds in my garden. 

It’s easy to clean and should last several years. 

Buy: £12.99 from Peckish.

 Now the bird feeder test is over, I just wanted to let everyone know what has happened to the bird feeders I tested. Three of them have been found new homes in the gardens of schools in my local area, and one has been returned to the manufacturer. I have decided to keep the Peckish lantern feeder and the Wilko bird butter feeder for my own garden - I’ve paid for the Peckish feeder and will be donating the cost of the Wilko feeder to the Heritage Seed Library.

 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information. 