When Chris Sullivan was nine, his mother went into hospital and he never saw her again. She was dead but he was never told – and for years he thought she was still alive

I remember Christmas Day at my uncle’s house as if it were yesterday. Full of excitement, I burst into a room where my father and his other male relatives were talking. It suddenly went quiet. Every face wore an expression of guilt. I realise now that they were probably telling stories that were not fit for the ears of a nine-year-old. At the time, I thought they were discussing the secret whereabouts of my mother.

Nine months earlier, my brother and I had been sent to stay with another aunt and uncle after Mum was taken into hospital. We wallowed in the relative luxury of their semi-detached house, with garden, which was roomier than our two-bedroom council flat.

When my father turned up at my aunt’s house around 10 days later, he took us into an empty room. He knelt, put his arms around us and said: “God has decided to take your mother to heaven. She passed away last week.”

My 13-year-old brother ran upstairs crying. Should I follow him? I stood, cold, disoriented, unsure of what to do. I looked at Dad, hoping he would take back the words, but his bloodshot, watery eyes told me that was not an option.

The reality of that short statement floated precariously above my head for a frozen moment. Then my tears came, out of confusion as much as the hollow feeling of loss. I never gave God a positive thought from that day on, possibly in retaliation for his act of cruelty towards me.

I was a young child, but I knew what death meant. But I didn’t understand the consequences of death – how the course of my life was going to change in such a momentous fashion.

When we arrived home later that day, none of us knew what to do. No one spoke. The flat, somehow, looked totally different from how I remembered it. It had been scrubbed clean of Mum. There were no pictures of her on display. Her jewellery and clothes had all gone. The place even had a different smell. It was as if she had never existed.

I think the reason my father decided to not to tell us of Mum’s death until after the funeral was probably to protect us from pain. For me, it was a bad decision. For many years afterwards, I never really believed that she was dead. I had no proof. Maybe she had simply gone away – just packed her belongings and left us.

Dad hardly ever mentioned her again, which left me with a sense of mystery bordering on wrong-doing. In those early days, in my clouded, juvenile brain, her absence felt as if it were a closely guarded secret. I had recurring dreams that focused on this theme, which lasted into my early 20s.

Weeks after her death, when I was alone in the flat, I more than once ventured into Dad’s bedroom and sat on the stool in front of the walnut dressing table. There, I would stare into the enormous rectangular mirror in the hope that I might get a glimpse of her reflection. I had seen my mother sit there countless times to apply her makeup or brush her hair. It was the one place that she sat still and it remained the only piece of property that was primarily hers.

One afternoon, while foraging around in the dressing table drawers, I discovered Mum’s silk scarf tucked away behind a raft of paperwork. It smelled of her perfume. I had at last got something in my hands that provided affirmation she had been real. For years afterwards, I would sneak into that bedroom to retrieve the scarf and breathe in Mum. It had crossed my mind that, perhaps, one day she would realise she had left it behind and return to collect it.

It was around the second week of March, two months after my ninth birthday, that Mum had contracted rheumatic fever and been taken into hospital. It was a recurrence of the debilitating disease she had as a seven-year-old. By the second week of her stay, she had made great progress and was moved to a convalescent home in Bexhill-on-Sea. After two weeks she was home, looking slightly tanned and healthy. Four days later, she complained of a migraine and was back in hospital. It was then that we were packed off to my aunt and uncle’s house.

My mother died of a primary brain tumour. She was 34. From that day, the smooth flow of my childhood was diverted down an unfamiliar and irrevocable path. At such a young age, the relationship with your parents is taken for granted and never assessed. It is only when one of them is taken away that you become aware of the vital roles both play in your upbringing. My father was the voice of discipline, strength, direction; my mother was the flip-side of that parental coin. Her love was unconditional, pliable; soothing the doubts, the scrapes and scratches of fledgling life. So my fear that she might have abandoned us didn’t make sense.

The loss of a feminine hand soon became apparent. Despite our efforts, the flat always felt dirty and empty. And, to a great extent, so did I. To my horror and embarrassment, I started to wet the bed. At least three days a week, I would wake in the early hours of the morning lying on a urine-soaked sheet.

My friends at primary school all at once approached me with a mixture of awkward questions and confused looks. Teachers, too. Overnight I had become different – an oddity, a question mark. And in the presence of my friends’ mothers, I suddenly felt awkward, as if I didn’t fit in.

At first, I would cry when there was any reference to my mother, but it soon stopped. I realised very quickly that strength was far more attractive than weakness. A feeling of inferiority sat awkwardly with a deep-seated anger and sense of unfairness that lurked beneath the surface.

I couldn’t tell anyone of my fears and insecurities: no one wanted to know, nobody understood. I found that the only way I could release those feelings was to write poems and short stories. It was an outlet that served me well. At the age of 10, I could express my emotions, using the written word, in a far more lucid way than would otherwise have been possible, given a young boy’s lack of social skills and restricted power of speech.

When my brother got a job at 16 in a working men’s club I was 12 and putting myself to bed. At times during the evening, the electricity meter would run out, throwing the flat into darkness. Stumbling around looking for shillings for the meter initiated a fear of intruders that still creeps into the odd bad dream.

Not being allowed to witness the official ceremony and associated mourning of my mother’s death left me without closure. By trying to shield me from grief, my father, regrettably, merely added to my inner torment.

At the age of 21, I received news that Dad had died suddenly of a brain haemorrhage. I insisted on seeing his body before the funeral. Although it was not a pleasant experience, I needed that confirmation that I hadn’t been given when my mother passed away. It was only then that I was able to silence the doubts and whispers I had carried around for so long.

Reasonable Force by CT Sullivan is published by Pegasus Elliot Mackenzie