Baking the seasons: Clementine and ricotta make a harmonious pairing, their respective sweetness and dairy tang performing a pitch perfect duet in desserts. Try this luxurious cheesecake garnished with pomegranate, or honey-drizzled fritters

Clementines are synonymous with the holidays. I keep bowls of them all over the house and the bakery for easy snacking access and for their fragrance. They are a perfect size and, usually, easy to peel.

I have been reading Helena Attlee’s wonderful little book The Land Where Lemons Grow. She tells the story of how two seedlings from a mandarin – the mother of all clementines – first came to the Royal gardens at Kew from Canton, China in the early 19th century. Then they made their way first to Malta, and then to Sicily where they flourished, were hybridised and eventually became the fruit we know and love. It’s inspiring to know that while we cannot grow them in the UK, their proliferation is due, in part, to one passionate connoisseur and citrus enthusiast.

The zest of the clementine perfumes this week’s cheesecake and makes it feel perfect for the close of the holiday season. A good cheesecake is hard to find – it must be simultaneously creamy and light. It should not be too sweet and it should have a little tang to it. This one uses mostly sweeter cheeses – mascarpone and ricotta, with just a little Philadelphia, and the added acid of lemon to round out the flavour. Finally, using the jewel-like seeds of a ruby-red pomegranate as a garnish brings the cheesecake to life.

The other recipe this week is a fritter because, well, fritters are a favourite. With both ricotta and clementine pieces inside these small, crisply encased pillows, you get a different perspective on a similar riff. The sweet, sour and fragrant notes of a clementine marry well with the creaminess of a fresh cheese, such as ricotta. Perhaps an unlikely pairing in a fritter, but I am both passionate and enthusiastic about it.

Use up the last remaining pieces of holiday fruits in your bowl with this refreshing cheesecake.

Makes 1 cheesecake20g fresh white breadcrumbs250g ricotta 250g cream cheese250g mascarpone100g double cream4 tbsp CointreauZest of three clementines (eat the fruit as a snack)The juice of one lemon4 eggs, separated½ tsp fine sea salt½ tsp ground cinnamon150g caster sugar1 pomegranate

1 Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3½. Butter a 23cm springform baking tin and dust it with the breadcrumbs.

2 In a food processor blend the ricotta, cream cheese, mascarpone and cream with the Cointreau, clementine zest, and lemon juice until smooth. Add the egg yolks and cinnamon.

3 In a clean bowl, whip the egg whites with the salt into soft peaks, then add the caster sugar. Fold together with the cream‑cheese mixture and pour into your prepared baking dish. Wrap the base in kitchen foil and then put inside a large roasting tin. Fill the tin with boiled water up to about halfway up the cake tin. Bake for 45-50 minutes, or until set.

4 Once the cheesecake has cooled completely, run a paring knife along the inside of the tin and pop it open with the latch. Use a palette knife to slide underneath the cake to unearth it and move it to a serving plate. Cover the top with pomegranate seeds and serve.

These fritters are about warm, citrus-laced sweet and fresh cheese. Adding the little bits of clementine flesh gives you an unexpected juicy burst of flavour which I adore. Buy clementines that feel heavy for their size and with fragrant peels. This will assure freshness.

Makes about 36400g ricotta3 eggs50g whole milkZest and fruit of 3 clementines170g plain flour1½ tsp baking powder150g caster sugar¼ tsp fine sea saltOil, for deep frying (about 1 litre)2 tsp cinnamon Honey, to serve

1 In a medium bowl, beat the ricotta and eggs with the milk and clementine zest. Peel the clementines, slice them into discs, then pull apart the individual sections. They should look like little pie shapes. Add to the eggs and ricotta mixture.

2 In another bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder and 50g of the caster sugar.

3 Gently combine the wet and dry ingredients and allow the mixture to rest for 10 minutes.

4 Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan until it reaches 180C/350F. Don’t let the oil overheat, or the fritters will burn on the outside and be raw in the middle. Have a plate ready, lined with 3 layers of kitchen towel.

5 Dollop heaped teaspoon-sized scoops (I use a truffle scoop with a quick release, but you could use two teaspoons) into the hot oil. Flip after a few minutes when nice and golden on one side. Fry until the second side is golden too, then remove with a slotted spoon on to your prepared plate. Keep these in a warm place.

6 Whisk together the remaining 100g of caster sugar with the cinnamon in a medium bowl and toss the hot fritters to coat them. Keep them in a warm oven until ready to serve.

7 Transfer to a nice dish and serve with honey.