If you are easing up for January why not spend some of the money you save on something unexpected? Here are three bottles to tempt you.

Uvaggio Vermentino, Lodi, California, USA 2013 (£11.99, Berry Bros & Rudd) If you’re going to make a New Year’s resolution about wine, most likely it will be to give it up either for good or for a dry January. Mine would be to drink less and use the pennies I’ve saved from my usual daily mediocre bottles for a slightly more expensive weekend treat. I’d be more adventurous, too, going for things that at first glance maybe look a little weird, or at least not the usual. California winery Uvaggio offers a pair of possibilities, on sale at Berry Bros & Rudd. Both the deliciously svelte and cherry-tart-and-juicy red Primitivo 2011 (£14.99) and the punchy, herby, lime-and-peach of the Vermentino are among the most successful (and reasonably priced) wines made from Italian varieties outside their native land.

Pittnauer Velvet, Burgenland, Austria NV (from £11.70, Bottle Apostle; l’Art du Vin) Although the varied, white pepper-spiced whites (from crisp and green to fleshy and rich) made from grüner veltliner have become relatively easy to find in supermarkets, the red wines of Austria are on the whole still rather under-rated in the UK. The quality has been improving for some time now, however, and I’ll be looking to drink a lot more of them in 2016. Two that showed well in tastings last year, both of them from the Burgenland region, were Gerhard and Brigitte Pittnauer’s intriguing non-vintage blend of two native grape varieties (blaufränkisch, zweigelt) with cabernet, which has the sappy succulence and crunch for sausages; and the vivacious black berries and liquorice of Feiler-Artinger Blaufränkisch 2014 (£11.29, Waitrose).

The Liberator Old Breton Episode Five, South Africa 2013 (from £16.50, Wine Trust 100; Bottle Apostle; Wood Winters) Cabernet franc is fast becoming my favourite red grape: it has a feel not dissimilar to cabernet sauvignon with a floral elegance more akin to pinot noir, but the combination is entirely distinctive. At its best in the Loire and Bordeaux, where it’s long established and where winemakers know how to retain some leafy freshness, many of the examples I’ve tried from South Africa have been syrupy and dull. But this one, part of a series of one-off wines sourced from various producers in the Cape by Brit Richard Kelley, gets it just right. It has a little more flesh than a Loire version, but it retains the green tint and fluent red fruit – a joyous start to the new wine year.

Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach

 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information. 