The hypnotist, 52, on dating, dieting and living the dream

Catholic school roughed me up. On day one, we were told: “In God’s eyes, you’re all turds.” I witnessed violence, paedophilia and some of the most heinous, disgusting people. I agree with Stephen Fry: the Catholic church is not a force for good.

I learned how to be an entertainer when I was a radio DJ. I became a hypnotist after I interviewed one on air. The guy said he sensed I was stressed and 25 minutes later all my burdens had lifted. I borrowed a book from him by Dr Richard Bandler and began hypnotising friends at parties.

Diets don’t work. I tell people about this and it makes the diet industry furious – I’m a real annoyance to them. Weight-loss clubs are like cults.

I wish I could be zen and say I don’t love my Bentley. But it’s a piece of performance art. I am the man they made that car for. Everything about it is beautiful.

Every day, I get up and think: “What can I bring to this day?” I figure I have about 10,000 days left and I intend to spend every one having fun. But that’s not always possible. A few months ago, one of my friends just dropped down dead. I felt numb for a very long time.

Many psychoanalysts are full of bullshit. Let’s not forget that Freud was injecting enough cocaine to kill a small horse. I don’t have all the answers. I’m a behavioural scientist. I go on results.

I have a very eclectic mix of friends: Paul Oakenfold, Harvey Weinstein – there’s something unique and amazing about everyone. People motivate me and the “Mandelbrot set of humanity” fascinates me.

I’ve dated a lot of beautiful women. A friend pointed out I didn’t actually like them, and advised me to make an Excel spreadsheet to find out who I really loved. It came down to Kate [Davey, his long-time PA]. We’d worked together for many years; thankfully she felt the same way and now we’re engaged. I feel I’ve learned more with her in the last three years than the rest of my life.

Right now, I’m living rich. I’m healthy, in a happy relationship, and feel very lucky. Whenever myself and Ryan Seacrest, who I met in 2010, are having one of those rich moments, we text each other “LTD” – living the dream.

If I could, I would go back to 1978. Disco music was glamorous, flares were in, The Sweeney was on TV and I had just discovered girls.

It’s a Wonderful Life is still the best film ever made. I give it to my clients all the time to cheer them up. I watched it with my father just before he died. We had tears rolling down our cheeks.

I want to spend more time in the UK. After 10 years in LA, the home of ruthless overachievers, I’ve realised most of my real friends are in Europe. I envisage a place in Buckinghamshire with a horse, a couple of dogs and a comfy couch.

Paul McKenna’s new book, Instant Influence and Charisma, is out now (£12.99, Bantam Press). To buy a copy for £10.39, visit bookshop.theguardian.com