Get ahead: The most moreish of Italian treats, amaretti biscuits are often lingering around after the festivities. If you’re stumped for ideas for how to use them up, try this surprising quartet of ravioli, chicken salad, plum crumble and orange yoghurt pots

Not too sweet and with a captivating bitterness, amaretti are a storecupboard favourite and a worthy bite all year round. Pulverised almonds with sugar, a pinch of salt and beaten egg white a key ingredient in Italian cookery. Eaten as is with coffee or crumbled and used in both sweet and savoury settings, amaretti can give a beguiling liveliness to all manner of dishes. Granted, if you make your own, they won’t come in the beautiful papery wrappers of the amaretti di Saronno. But, this being January, you might even have a few of those lying round post Christmas should you want to want to skip this main recipe and head straight instead for one of the others ...

How long you bake your amaretti will determine their finished texture – either crisp throughout or soft and squidgy in the middle. Store in an airtight container for up to a week.

Makes 20300g almonds, blanched300g caster sugar, extra for sprinkling on top5 egg whitesA pinch of salt

1 Set the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Blitz the almonds. With the motor still running, add ⅓ of the sugar, little by little, until well combined.

2 Whisk the egg whites until stiff. Fold in the remaining sugar and the salt.

3 Fold some of the beaten egg whites into the almond mixture to loosen, the nut mix and then fold the almond mix back into the remaining egg whites. Mix gently but decisively until the mixture is cohesive.

4 Line two baking trays with parchment paper, then shape a teaspoon of dough into a round or oval, and place on the tray. Repeat, placing the nuggets 2cm apart.

5 Sprinkle the amaretti shapes liberally with sugar. Bake for 25-30 minutes, rotating the baking sheets in the oven once, so they bake evenly, until light golden brown and crisp to the touch. Cool on a wire rack before serving.

Orange-scented yoghurt set with smashed amaretti makes a charming and easy pudding.

Makes 4 200ml double cream 175g thick Greek yoghurt 175g orange curdZest of 1 orange80-100g amaretti, roughly crushed

1 Whisk the cream gently into soft, rather than pointy, peaks. Fold in the yoghurt, then the orange curd. Gently mix in the amaretti and zest. Spoon into little bowls, or teacups, cover tightly with clingfilm. Refrigerate for at least 2 hours to firm up.

2 Serve well chilled with a few extra amaretti on the side.

A typical pasta dish from the northern region of Emilia-Romagna. The gentle bitterness of the almonds works well with the mildness of the pumpkin.

Makes 20 450g pumpkin flesh, peeled and chopped 1 tbsp olive oil25g parmesan cheese¼ tsp ground gingerA pinch of freshly grated nutmeg3 amaretti, crushedSalt and black pepper

For the pasta dough180g 00-flour ¼ tsp salt1 tbsp olive oil2 medium eggs3 medium egg yolks

For the butter75g unsalted butter20 small sage leaves1 tbsp lemon juiceParmesan, to serve

1 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Put all the pasta dough ingredients into a food processor and blend until they come together into a ball. Alternatively, you can do this by hand by making a well in the middle of the flour and working the dough together to form a ball.

2 Tip the dough out and knead for 5 minutes, until it is smooth and elastic. You want the surface of the dough to have a good sheen and not tear easily. Wrap the dough in clingfilm and rest it in the fridge for 20 minutes.

3 Mix the pumpkin with the oil, salt and pepper, then roast for 20-30 minutes until tender. When cool enough to handle, mash the pumpkin with a fork in a bowl with the parmesan, spices, and crushed amaretti biscuits, plus salt and pepper to taste.

4 Cut the pasta dough into thirds. Work with one piece at a time, leaving the rest wrapped and in the fridge. Roll out thinly, preferably using a pasta machine. Lightly dust the dough with flour between each roll. Start on the largest setting and finish on the thinnest.

5 Place the pasta sheet on a lightly floured surface. Put 1 tsp of the filling at 8cm intervals along the bottom half of the sheet. Brush a little water around each pile of pumpkin filling.

6 Fold over the top half of the dough. Work from one end, pressing firmly around each dollop of filling with your fingers to remove air bubbles and seal it inside. Trim the edges, then cut between the rows with a fluted pasta wheel, or a sharp knife.

7 Line a baking tray with parchment and dust it with flour. Lay the ravioli on top, making sure they don’t touch. Put the tray in the fridge. Repeat with the rest of the dough. If you are not going to eat the ravioli that day, freeze immediately on greaseproof paper, making sure that they aren’t touching each other. These will cook well from frozen for 4-5 minutes in boiling water.

8 Meanwhile, bring a large pot of salted water to the boil. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a frying pan until foaming, throw in the sage and fry for about 10 seconds. Remove the pan from the heat and add the lemon juice and some salt and pepper to taste.

9 Cook the ravioli all at once in boiling water for 3 minutes. Drain. Divide between warmed plates. Pour the warm sage butter over the ravioli, with extra grated parmesan and serve.

Pangrattato – or breadcrumbs – can offer an alluring crunch to many Italian soups, salads and gratins. Likewise, bashed-up amaretti work wonders here scattered in this salad, boosting both texture and flavour. 

Serves 4100g amaretti, roughly broken up and crushed50g pine nuts, toasted1 small radicchio, roughly chopped2-3 blood oranges, peeled and cut into segments500g leftover roast chicken, torn into piecesA small bunch of flat-leaf parsley, roughly chopped80ml extra virgin olive oil2 tbsp red wine vinegarSalt and black pepper

1 Toast the pine nuts with the broken amaretti in a dry frying pan on a medium heat for about 2 minutes, until the pine nuts are light brown in colour and the amaretti are fragrant. Leave to cool.

2 Add the roughly chopped radicchio to a large serving bowl (you can use an alternative lettuce here if you’d rather). Add the fruit and the chicken to the bowl along with the chopped parsley.

3 Make a dressing with the olive oil, vinegar and seasoning in a separate bowl. Dress the salad with the oil and vinegar and scatter with the toasted amaretti and pine-nut mix to serve.

Use any suitable crumble fruit. I think almonds work especially well with plums in this recipe, but apples or peaches in season would be good too.

Serves 4-6100g amaretti, crushed120g unsalted butter, cold, cubed1kg plums, stoned and quartered 80–100g sugarJuice of ½ lemon140g wholemeal or plain flour (or a mix of both)1 tsp baking powder

1 Set the oven to 190C/375/gas mark 5. Tip the plums, 30g of the butter, 40-50g of the sugar, the lemon juice and a small splash of water into a deep, ovenproof pie dish, giving the mix a good stir. Put in the hot oven for 5–10 minutes until the plums have softened slightly. The fruit should have softened and sit in their juices. Put to one side and make the crumble topping.

2 Quickly pulse the flour, baking powder, remaining sugar and butter in a food processor until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs. Take care not to over mix. Alternatively rub the butter into the flour with your fingers. Add the crushed amaretti into the crumble topping and gently mix. Pour the mixture over the plums.

3 Bake for 35 minutes, or until it is bubbling at the edges and the top is golden brown. Rest for 5 minutes before eating. Serve with ice-cream, whipped cream, custard or creme fraiche.