The Lanarkshire-based firm has caused a stir by dropping the lion rampant from a new advert for its famous marshmallow treat – but it’s not the first time a biscuit has turned into a political hot potato

Name: Tunnock’s teacake.

Age: About 62 years.

Appearance: At the Commonwealth Games, on doilies, in Scottish hearts, on the tube.

Are we talking about Scotland’s most iconic biscuit maker? That depends how you assess the competing claims of, among others, Walkers shortbread and McVitie’s.

I’m going to pretend you said yes. Fine.

So, what has Tunnock’s done? Dropped the Scottish symbol of a lion rampant from its logo for a new teacake advert on London Underground.

Is this to appease its English overlords? Essentially. It’s complicated, though: there has always been a version of the logo without the lion, and the lion appears on the pack shot in the corner. However, the ad carries the headline “The Great British Teacake”, which is a provocative phrase.

How so? Britishness doesn’t appeal to a large minority of Scots, who nearly rejected it in 2014.

Maybe it’s best to stay away from emotive nationalism when you’re selling biscuits? Maybe. But it isn’t easy. Company patriarch Boyd Tunnock says his son-in-law Fergus Loudon, who came up with the campaign, only meant to riff on the success of the Great British Bake Off. He also says that many English people don’t even realise that Tunnock’s is Scottish.

Those English! They don’t deserve to have Scotland stuck to them. However … Tunnock’s also admitted that it won’t use “Great British” in Scotland. “We’d just say teacakes.”

“Tunnock’s. The Teacakes”? I suppose so. At this point, it may be worth noting that Boyd Tunnock is a prominent and longstanding supporter of Scotland’s union with England.

I’m confused. Is this deliberate biscuit agitprop or isn’t it? Who knows. Politics is everywhere in biscuits. When the design agency Super Cyan Submarine was making brochures to promote Tunnock’s in China, it had to take great pains to avoid any reference to that country’s past oppression by Japan.

What? “The worry [was] that the Tunnock’s teacake design could be confused with the very stereotypical rising sun emblem of Japan, due to the red and white striped graphics. We had to be extremely conscientious and considerate of this concern throughout the design process.”

Oh good grief. I said it wasn’t easy.

Do say: “Do KitKats think we should renew the Trident nuclear missile programme?”

Don’t say: “I don’t know, but Penguins definitely want faster action on climate change.”